[Amit Varma]: One of the things that makes us unique as a species is our language. Humans speak in
[Amit Varma]: languages that can embody concepts, construct and contain narratives, communicate across
[Amit Varma]: time and space. And yet, just as language unites us, it also divides us. There are over
[Amit Varma]: 6,000 languages in existence, at least 1,000 of which have a written form. We live this
[Amit Varma]: beautiful diversity every day on the streets of India. And there is great art created in
[Amit Varma]: all these languages, the best of which combines local flavor with a universal essence, which
[Amit Varma]: anyone from anywhere could relate to, if they could understand the language. This multiplicity
[Amit Varma]: of languages is beautiful, but presents one problem. As readers, how can we understand
[Amit Varma]: the wonders of other languages? We rely on translation. And that is why if language is
[Amit Varma]: essential and writing is important, then translation matters.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen. My subject today is the art of translation. And my guest
[Amit Varma]: is Auronavo Sinha, who is no stranger to lovers of Bengali literature. Auronavo has translated
[Amit Varma]: more than 50 books from Bengali to English and has introduced authors such as Asha Poornadevi,
[Amit Varma]: Shankar, Bankimchandra Chattopadhyay, Sharadandu Bondopadhyay, Sunil Gangopadhyay, Bonofool
[Amit Varma]: Buddhadeb Bose, Banuranjan Byapari and Noborun Bhattacharya to a wider English reading audience.
[Amit Varma]: I'm delighted that he's agreed to join me for a conversation today. But before we begin,
[Amit Varma]: let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoy listening to The Seen and the Unseen, you can play a part in keeping the
[Amit Varma]: show alive. The Seen and the Unseen has been a labor of love for me. I've enjoyed putting
[Amit Varma]: together many stimulating conversations, expanding my brain and my universe, and hopefully yours
[Amit Varma]: as well. But while the work has been its own reward, I don't actually make much money off
[Amit Varma]: the show. Although The Seen and the Unseen has great numbers, advertisers haven't really
[Amit Varma]: woken up to the insane engagement level of podcasts. I do many, many hours of deep research
[Amit Varma]: for each episode, besides all the logistics of producing the show myself, scheduling guests,
[Amit Varma]: booking studios, paying technicians, the travel and so on. So well, I'm trying a new way of
[Amit Varma]: keeping this thing going. And that involves you. My proposition for you is this. For every
[Amit Varma]: episode of The Seen and the Unseen that you enjoy, buy me a cup of coffee, or even a lavish
[Amit Varma]: lunch, whatever you feel it's worth. You can do this by heading over to seen unseen.in slash
[Amit Varma]: support and contributing an amount of your choice. This is not a subscription. The Seen
[Amit Varma]: and the Unseen will continue to be free on all podcast apps and at seen unseen.in. This
[Amit Varma]: is just a gesture of appreciation. Help keep the thing going. Seen unseen.in slash support.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen. Thank you, Amit. Thank you for having me here. So
[Amit Varma]: you know, before we sort of get to your fascinating career, I remember you, I remember your byline
[Amit Varma]: from like a long, long time ago, mainly as a journalist. Then I gradually became aware
[Amit Varma]: of your remarkable career and all these books. And I'm of course, half Bengali. And yeah,
[Amit Varma]: you know, my father reads all your books and talks about you a lot. So I think he'll be
[Amit Varma]: delighted that you're finally on my show. Tell me a little bit about yourself. Like,
[Guest]: you know, where did you grow up? What was your education? Yeah, so I was born in Calcutta
[Guest]: and I grew up there. Well, I technically spent the first four years of my life in Bombay,
[Guest]: but very faint memories of that period. I went to school in Calcutta. And then like
[Guest]: all or most Bengali boys of my generation, I was prepping for a, you know, you either
[Guest]: go into medicine or you go into engineering. And I was prepping for engineering. I actually
[Guest]: got in surprising even myself. I got into Jadavpur University and I joined electrical
[Guest]: engineering. It took about three weeks to realise that this was not for me. And also
[Guest]: that you know, there was no sense in wasting what could be the best or some of the best
[Guest]: years of your life studying something that you didn't want to. So I contrived to fail
[Guest]: enough papers and create and burn my boats as it was so that there was no looking back.
[Guest]: I couldn't go back and start again. And I started afresh the next year with English
[Guest]: literature in the same university on the same campus. So it was a complete turn as far as
[Guest]: I imagine that my life took a completely different turn. While I was studying English literature,
[Guest]: the whole idea was then I was fairly set on being an academic. So you know, BA, MA, then
[Guest]: you go for, back then you had to do an MFL and then you try to go abroad for a period.
[Guest]: So that was the set path. But we used to bring out a college magazine, you know, in the old
[Guest]: cyclostyle format. And immediately after my BA final exams, a job opportunity opened up
[Guest]: in a youth magazine in Calcutta, which I took. And six months or not even six months, within
[Guest]: three months of that, I was sure that that was what I wanted to do. So there went the
[Guest]: academic track completely. I enrolled for my MA, didn't go through with it after the
[Guest]: first year, and just became a journalist. And that too, a sort of entrepreneurial journalist
[Guest]: in the sense that it was our own magazine. After we managed to run that to the ground
[Guest]: in about two years, we started a city magazine, and that was funded by what you would today
[Guest]: call an angel investor. And that did quite well. We actually had a circulation of about
[Guest]: 20,000.
[Guest]: Wow, that's crazy.
[Guest]: And yeah, a monthly magazine. And we even pioneered this whole business of local listings,
[Guest]: paid local listings, which became the rage much later. So it was good, but we couldn't
[Guest]: manage the finances well enough. So four years later, the angel investor who had since then
[Guest]: handed over to another one, they said, sorry, we were out of cash.
[Guest]: What was this called?
[Guest]: It was called Calcutta Skyline.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: But interestingly, it was also where the seeds of my future, which I had no idea about at
[Guest]: that stage as a translator, was sown because we used to translate one short story from
[Guest]: Bengali every month for every issue. And I did several of those translations and also
[Guest]: sort of spearheaded that whole initiative, roping in others to translate as well. So
[Guest]: then I worked for a little bit longer in Calcutta and then moved to Delhi as, believe it or
[Guest]: not, a business journalist, with having absolutely zero credentials, except writing. But I worked
[Guest]: for Business Today for eight years, which became a management magazine in the 90s. So
[Guest]: it was interesting because you didn't have to know the nuts and bolts of what normally
[Guest]: went into a business magazine. And doing a management oriented magazine meant that you
[Guest]: had to read enormously and assimilate enormously and then write it in a way that would be both
[Guest]: engaging and lucid.
[Guest]: Then in 2000, you know, even then we were writing about the net a good deal because
[Guest]: technology was very much part of management. And then in 2000, when the internet media
[Guest]: opened up in India, so I decided that I was going to move in there. So I sort of walked
[Guest]: into the india.com offices. And I said, you know, this is where I'm going to work. And
[Guest]: they said, Who the hell are you? So I said, it doesn't matter how many people do you have
[Guest]: walking in to say that they want to work for you. So you know, just don't look gift houses
[Guest]: in the mouth. I've been a journalist and just take my word for it. So they did actually
[Guest]: and I moved to Bangalore from Delhi. And so yeah, I'd moved to Delhi before that from
[Guest]: Calcutta for Business Today and then on to Bangalore for two years. Then, as usual, with
[Guest]: my Midas touch india.com folded. So then I moved back to Delhi with India Times. And
[Guest]: then it was in the internet for a long time after that for about 12 years, being a journalist.
[Guest]: And then I moved on to being a product manager, building new products, which I did for a startup
[Guest]: called ibibo. And then for NDTV.com as well. So yeah, this is my, my life as a journalist.
[Amit Varma]: Wow, that's quite an arc. And what kind of struck me when you were talking about your
[Amit Varma]: decision in college to fail your engineering exams was when you said that you decided immediately
[Amit Varma]: that you don't want to waste the best years of your life. Yeah. And the thought that struck
[Amit Varma]: me was that that is an enormous amount of maturity for a fresher undergrad. Because
[Amit Varma]: I remember at that age, my thinking was not at all as clear about things. And and then
[Amit Varma]: you said you went on to do English lit. So I'm guessing that a lot of this must have
[Amit Varma]: been driven by a love for books. So what kind of books did you read? Did you read in both
[Amit Varma]: English and Bengali? You know, what was the shaping of your literary taste?
[Guest]: So I used to read exclusively in Bengali till the age of about eight. I started reading
[Guest]: quite early. By about five, I was reading. And I was reading Bangla till eight when I
[Guest]: discovered till seven, when I discovered Enid Blyton. And then I did this sort of overnight
[Guest]: shift to reading English books. And so yeah, also school life, I think I devoured everything
[Guest]: there was for our age group. So starting with Enid Blyton, and then there were other very
[Guest]: interesting school series around that time, you know, there was a lovely one by Eleanor
[Guest]: M. Brent Dyer called the Chalice School, which was quite exotic, because that school was
[Guest]: not even located anywhere fixed, they would move around different European countries.
[Guest]: And back then in the 1970s, European countries were just a concept. I mean, you know, we
[Guest]: had no idea what it actually meant. But this school was in Switzerland today and in Germany
[Guest]: tomorrow, and it was a girl's school. So there was this, you know, other sort of undercurrent
[Guest]: of fascination also because of the fact that these were clearly teenage girls, although
[Guest]: completely antiseptic. But, you know, there were two levels of attraction as it were,
[Guest]: as one grew older. So there was those and then there was some teenage science fiction,
[Guest]: a series called Tom Swift, which I remember reading a lot of and then moving very quickly
[Guest]: on to trash. So Alastair Maclean, which is not trash, really, and Desmond Bagley, and
[Guest]: then anything on the shelves at home, and I read indiscriminately, like I think everybody
[Guest]: who loves everybody. So you pick one book, and then you pick the next book, and you pick
[Guest]: the next book. So with the result that I was reading Camus, The Outsider, followed by Harold
[Guest]: Robbins, Carpetbagger, followed by The Old Man and the Sea, which I hated at that point.
[Guest]: You still hate it?
[Guest]: Yeah, I'm ambivalent about Old Man. I'm ambivalent about, I mean, great writing, but too much
[Guest]: machismo for me. And then Somerset Maugham, whom I really couldn't stand. I don't know.
[Guest]: And unfortunately, I think some of these early impressions are very hard to undo. So even
[Guest]: if it turns out later that no, no, no, these are good people to read, you are just somehow,
[Guest]: you know, it's baked into you that I don't like Somerset Maugham and that's it. But yeah,
[Guest]: and Woodhouse, I said, and Woodhouse, I think was the biggest value of reading Woodhouse
[Guest]: was becoming sensitive about language. But Woodhouse, he almost read purely at the level
[Amit Varma]: of language.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's the whole point.
[Guest]: The incidents didn't matter at all. Right. So yeah, so quite a lot of reading. Bangla,
[Guest]: I did not read too much at that point. But we had to study it in school. And then I found
[Guest]: it very difficult to write. It was proving to be a very tall order. So my uncle, my father's
[Guest]: elder cousin, who himself is a poet, he put me through my paces of writing by making me
[Guest]: summarise the art textbooks. And that in some mysterious way got me into both reading and
[Guest]: writing Bangla again at a more mature level. My spelling, my Bangla spelling became almost
[Guest]: perfect, which is unbelievable. But I realised that by the act of writing fixes your spelling.
[Guest]: Then I started reading a good deal in Bangla as well, starting, mind you, with trash. I
[Guest]: still remember this one particular book, which was called Hutta Himel Hawa, which literally
[Guest]: is, you know, murder cold wind. And there was this very clear extramarital affair that
[Guest]: was going on between the wife of an industrialist and her sarod instructor. And it was full
[Guest]: of these very elegant ways of describing physical relationships, you know, so much so that for
[Guest]: the longest time, I always used to think that a kiss could only be described as imprinting
[Guest]: the mark of your lips on another's. I mean, I did not know any other way of putting it.
[Guest]: So yeah. But yeah, I read, I read a lot in both languages. That is true.
[Amit Varma]: No, and this is making me really nostalgic. Because obviously, you know, there are certain
[Amit Varma]: authors and certain sort of canons, which are very familiar to Indians growing up in
[Unknown]: the 70s, 80s, 90s. I don't think Somerset Maugham would have been read so much outside
[Amit Varma]: the country necessarily in the West. But over here, and also the sort of the deification
[Amit Varma]: of Woodhouse and the pedestal that he is quite correctly put on, is sort of strikes a chord.
[Amit Varma]: Did you also want to be a writer?
[Guest]: No, I never actually wanted to be a writer.
[Amit Varma]: Even though you were a journalist, and you did write a lot?
[Guest]: Yeah, even so. I mean, yeah, I've never wanted to be to write and I'm full of admiration
[Guest]: for people who can write books. And I don't think I'm capable of actually finishing writing
[Guest]: a complete book.
[Amit Varma]: Well, that's very interesting. So, you know, so you you had translated these couple of
[Amit Varma]: stories for the magazine when you were young. And then you come back to translation more
[Guest]: than a decade and a half later.
[Guest]: So what happened was that just before I, so the story is that just before I left Calcutta,
[Guest]: this was in 1992. Shankod, who some of whose stories I had translated for the magazine,
[Guest]: actually, he got in touch with me, and he said that he wanted an English translation
[Guest]: of Chaurangi. And he said that it was for a French publisher who wanted to read an English
[Guest]: version before taking the decision to translate it into French. And back then, mind you, 92.
[Guest]: So I don't think English language publishing in the new wave had started yet. Penguin may
[Guest]: have just set up with Anando. No, they had, I think, by the late 80s, they were already
[Guest]: publishing Sunil Ganguly and others, I think. But yeah, they were the only ones. And there
[Guest]: was no sense that, you know, you could actually translate for being published, the concept
[Guest]: didn't exist. So I translated it for him in a few years, I did it in about a month and
[Guest]: a half, you know, staying back in the office late at night after work and bashing it out
[Guest]: on the office computer, and then taking printouts on those old accordion folded, you know, dot
[Guest]: matrix printers on those accordion folded pages. And then before leaving Delhi, leaving
[Guest]: Calcutta for Delhi, I handed him the whole potha, as it was, here's your novel in English.
[Amit Varma]: Was it the only copy that you handed?
[Guest]: It was the only copy. It was the only copy. And I gave it to him. No, but I kept a copy
[Guest]: on a five and a half inch floppy disk, which was the disk drive back then. A word star
[Guest]: document.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I remember those thin brown thingies.
[Guest]: Yeah. And I carried that with me under the impression that five and a half inch floppies
[Guest]: were going to live forever, and so on. And then I had a digital copy. So what me worry.
[Guest]: And then there was no word from him and nothing. Occasionally, you know, when I was when you
[Guest]: had this spiritual crisis at work, I would toy with the idea of let me translate a novel.
[Guest]: But of course, I never got beyond a line or two. Cut to 2006. Now 2006, I am already at
[Guest]: that age where I'm about to have a full blown midlife crisis. So red Ferrari or something
[Guest]: equally weird is going to happen. I know it. I know that it hit me in the face at that
[Guest]: point. When I get a call from Diya Kaur at Penguin, whom I because all Calcutta people,
[Guest]: you know, know one another. It's a village. So she called and she said, did you ever translate
[Guest]: Chaurangi? And I said, wow, this is a true blast from the past world. How did this come
[Guest]: to you? So she said, you know, we want to publish a translation and we got in touch
[Guest]: with the writer and Shankar said, look, there is a translation, but I don't remember who
[Guest]: did it, but I have the printout. So he sent it to us and I found your name on it. So luckily
[Amit Varma]: I put my name on the on the copy.
[Amit Varma]: Smart move. I think your floppy disk by now would have disappeared.
[Guest]: Yeah, so there's a story behind that as well. So and she said, so we'd love to publish it.
[Guest]: So I said, oh, that's fantastic. And what do I have to do? So she said, do you want
[Guest]: to take another look at the text? I said, okay, sure. And then I said, I don't need
[Guest]: a printout. I have my floppy disk. So I took my floppy disk, which had strangely enough,
[Guest]: survived several house moves and city moves and so on. So I took it to Nehru Place and
[Guest]: I said, can you get the data out of this one? But after two days, even they threw their
[Guest]: hand up and said, no, we are not able to. So I took that printout and I gave it to a
[Guest]: professional typist. And I said, now you type it all out for me, because by that time, of
[Guest]: course, we moved to a different platform. We've got Microsoft Word. So he typed it all
[Guest]: out for me. And then I lightly edited it a bit. And then that was it. They published
[Guest]: it. That was very unexpected. And was it successful? It was extreme. It's probably been my most
[Guest]: successful book, in the sense of sales in India. Yeah, it was extremely successful.
[Guest]: And funnily or not, I signed away the copyright and all monetary considerations at the time
[Guest]: I translated it for the princely sum, actually not princely, it was quite a decent amount
[Guest]: back then of 6,000 rupees, which was twice my monthly salary in the late 80s, in the
[Guest]: in 92.
[Amit Varma]: That's not bad.
[Guest]: That was 2x of my monthly salary, I used to earn 3,000 rupees a month. So I was very pleased
[Guest]: 6,000 rupees just as I'm moving cities was a windfall to me. But and I had no idea how
[Guest]: publishing worked, how copyrights worked and so on. So eventually turned out that I made
[Guest]: absolutely no money from the sales and from the sales abroad. But, you know, it started
[Guest]: me off on something on what's become my life. So I have...
[Amit Varma]: But is it fair to say that you do what you do because of the love of it, the money is
[Amit Varma]: a nice bonus. But it's the work is its own reward.
[Guest]: Yeah, the money is a nice bonus. And it helps holidays and other expenses. You can't build
[Guest]: your life around your earnings from translations. So yeah, it's not primarily the money, but
[Guest]: it isn't for I mean, I've met many translators around the world. And even the ones who earn
[Guest]: well, don't do it for the money, or primarily for the money.
[Amit Varma]: I was reading Edith Grossman's book, Why Translation Matters. And there's a quote from it, which
[Amit Varma]: struck me. And she writes, quote, translation is a strange craft, generally appreciated
[Amit Varma]: by writers, with a few glaring exceptions, like Milan Kundera, whose attack on his French
[Amit Varma]: translator was so virulent, it achieved a kind of a sour kind of notoriety. Undervalued
[Amit Varma]: by publishers, translators fees tend to be so low that agents generally are not interested
[Amit Varma]: in representing them. Trivialized by the academic world, there are still promotion and tenure
[Amit Varma]: committees that do not consider translations to be serious publications, and practically
[Amit Varma]: ignored by reviewers. Astonishingly, it is still possible to find reviews that do not
[Amit Varma]: even mention the translator's name, let alone discuss the quality of the translation. It
[Amit Varma]: is an occupation that many critics agree is impossible at best, a betrayal at worst, and
[Amit Varma]: on the average, probably not much more than the accumulated result of a diligent, even
[Amit Varma]: slavish familiarity with dictionaries, although bringing a text over into another language
[Amit Varma]: has a long and glorious history. Stop quote. So this brings me to the question, why on
[Amit Varma]: earth did you become a translator?
[Guest]: Yeah, so you know, it's a great question, because I don't know. And again, I've asked
[Guest]: others how, why and how, and all of them have the same answer. We don't know. There's some
[Guest]: button somewhere, you know, that makes you I think it's the instinct of amateur singer
[Guest]: who's quite good as a singer, but will never make it as a top class singer. So what do
[Guest]: you do when you hear anything, you start humming it, right? And you want to sing it to perfection,
[Guest]: because you want to recreate that same feeling that you had when you heard the original.
[Guest]: I think it's an instinct like that. So that's what makes you do it. But I can tell you this,
[Guest]: it's a drug. You start and you cannot stop. You really cannot stop you. I mean, I'm at
[Guest]: the point where if I finish like the, like Trollop. So like Trollop, I think it was Trollop,
[Guest]: if I finish a translation at 6.15 in the evening, I will start a new one at 6.25. I kid you
[Guest]: not. It is really like that. And because finishing a translation is such a feeling of the end
[Guest]: of the world that the only way you can survive is by starting the next one. So it is a drug.
[Guest]: And I think there's a certain amount of ego involved. Because you know, you feel, although
[Guest]: anyone not too many people might know that, hey, so many thousands of people would not
[Guest]: have read this book had I not translated it. And if you come to think of it, if translators
[Guest]: go on strike around the world, world literature is going to collapse. Publishing is going
[Guest]: to collapse. So it's incredible that something that is so important a part of the literary
[Guest]: system is actually not acknowledged for I think what it achieves, or the people behind
[Guest]: it are not acknowledged to the extent perhaps that they should. But having said that, I
[Guest]: don't think that that's a problem. Because you know, at the end of the day, there are
[Guest]: exceptions, I'm sure. But most translators don't do it for to be considered important
[Amit Varma]: people. And also, I would guess that when you translate something, you are of course,
[Amit Varma]: one you're driven by the book that you're translating is something that you love, and
[Amit Varma]: you want to share it with everyone, but also by the creative urge. Because, you know, typically,
[Amit Varma]: the non reader would assume that translation is nothing than you know, you can take a dictionary
[Amit Varma]: and one day AI will do it and you just transcribe all the words, but it's actually not that
[Amit Varma]: and I'm reminded of, you know, Gregory Rabassa, who was Marquez's famous translator, while
[Amit Varma]: you know, after he translated the book was asked this bizarre question by this interviewer
[Amit Varma]: on do you know enough Spanish to be able to translate the work and Rabassa's incredible
[Amit Varma]: response was that the question is not whether I know enough Spanish, the question is whether
[Amit Varma]: I know enough English, you know, thereby indicating that, you know, it's almost like creating
[Amit Varma]: an entirely new work, you know, another famous translator, Herbert Bates, who translated
[Amit Varma]: Odyssey earlier, of course, which is, you know, Emily Wilson's latest translation is
[Amit Varma]: quite mind blowing. But Bates said once said about translation, and this is a very sexist
[Amit Varma]: remark, but it was made many, many decades earlier, where he said that a translation
[Amit Varma]: can be like a wife, if she's beautiful, she won't be faithful. If she's faithful, she
[Amit Varma]: won't be beautiful, which is incredibly sexist, but there is something to that also. So is
[Amit Varma]: this a trade off that you encounter while translating that, you know, on the one hand,
[Amit Varma]: you want to get everything right, and you know, not change too much. But on the other
[Amit Varma]: hand, your true field to your true loyalty is to the essence of what is what the author
[Amit Varma]: is trying to convey. So how has your response to this evolved? Like, was this something
[Amit Varma]: that you thought about consciously reading up what others said on it, especially while
[Amit Varma]: doing your first translation? Or did you sort of discover your own thinking on it as you
[Guest]: went along?
[Guest]: Yeah, it's the latter. When I did my first translation, I had no idea of what thoughts
[Guest]: had gone into the process, especially because remember, those days, these books were not
[Guest]: available the way they are now and there was no internet. So there was no way really of
[Guest]: reading up. And if at all you went to the library and read, you only read things like
[Guest]: Walter Benjamin's famous essay and so on, which was delightful, but completely useless
[Guest]: when it came to actually translating into a translation strategy. So yeah, my first
[Guest]: and I realized when I look back now at my earlier work that I was very much focused
[Guest]: on bringing the words over into the new language. And very often that led to certain angularities.
[Guest]: One of a British critic described my translation of Chaurangi as fruity and spicy. And I think
[Guest]: it was a very kind way of saying that it was not English. It had all these, you know, exotic
[Guest]: equatorial flavours as it were from a different land. But in retrospect, I wonder if that's
[Guest]: necessarily a bad thing either. So, you know, the real battle is not about fealty and beauty
[Guest]: because there's no conflict between them. The real battle, which you're always fighting
[Guest]: and negotiating in your head is, let's say I'm translating from Bangla, well, let's say
[Guest]: I am translating from Bangla to English. So is my English going to bring Bangla into it?
[Guest]: Or is the Bangla text going to become an English text? That is the real battle, you know. So
[Guest]: the point is that, you know, after translation, will it then slip so easily into the stream
[Guest]: of English or literature written in the English language that you no longer think of its origins?
[Guest]: It now belongs to all the books that have been written in English. And that's a perfectly
[Guest]: fine strategy to go with. If in the process of doing that, you may have to do, you know,
[Guest]: adopt certain tactics where you are saying that I will not make the reader stumble on
[Guest]: anything when they're reading it in English because, hey, the reader did not stumble on
[Guest]: the original. So my attempt is to be faithful to the experience of the reader and the experience
[Guest]: of the reader in terms of the ease with which he can, he or she, they can navigate the text.
[Guest]: For example, if I am reading the original text with a sense of, I understand this, I
[Guest]: get this, should I make the reader interrogate the text when it goes into a new language
[Guest]: because I am insistent on keeping some of the flavours and material and words from the
[Guest]: original language? Or I can say that, no, it's not an English text. It is a text which
[Guest]: has been rendered into English, but it belongs to another language. And therefore, I don't
[Guest]: want you to read it as though it is part of the English canon. It is not. Remember always
[Guest]: that it is a Bangla text or a text in a language that you are not familiar with. Therefore,
[Guest]: you will encounter unfamiliarities the way you might not if you were reading a text written
[Guest]: in English. And that is correct. That is the right approach because the reader of the Bangla
[Guest]: text is not the reader of the English text. So why should I assume that two readers so
[Guest]: far separated in space and time should have exactly the same kind of response or that
[Guest]: the effect should be the same on both of you? And there is no one answer to this question.
[Guest]: You know, it's a question that we bat around in our heads. And it's a question that I encounter
[Guest]: continuously in the translation classes that I teach at Ashoka University. And I just eventually
[Guest]: tell everybody that you have to come to your own conclusion. Neither answer is right or
[Guest]: wrong. That is why you can have multiple translations of the same text and each may have a different
[Guest]: objective. Gayatri Chakraborty Spivak's translations of Mahasaya Dadevi, for example, is faithful
[Guest]: to all the academic aspects of the original text, which she wants to identify and then
[Guest]: carry across to the reader. So these academic aspects of the original text are not necessarily
[Guest]: what Mahasaya Dadevi intended when she was writing. But for an academic reader, for a
[Guest]: reader who's reading it with a particular objective, they're crucial. And if you can
[Guest]: get those aspects that you will respond to academically, cerebrally from the original
[Guest]: text, then you must do the same thing from the English text. Absolutely right. Her motive
[Guest]: is clearly enunciated in the extended introduction that she writes. So you know where she's coming
[Guest]: from. Someone else might say, no, I just want to read it for, translate it for someone who
[Guest]: is casually picking up a copy of the book and just wants to read it and is not interested
[Guest]: in the academic ramifications. So that'll lead to a different kind of translation. And
[Guest]: I'm not saying that these translations will be terrifically divergent from one another.
[Guest]: Not at all. I mean, I've often picked up, for example, Lydia Davis has translated Proust.
[Guest]: She's translated Swan's Way and she's called it the Way of Swan. And she says that my attempt
[Guest]: is not to make the French English, but to make sure that the reader understands that
[Guest]: there's a different language underneath, even if the words are English. To be honest, when
[Guest]: I read the two translations, I can see the difference, but they're not so far apart for
[Guest]: me that makes me think, oh, wow, this one is Anglicised and this one is not. But then
[Guest]: you realise that it lies in some details here and there. So the divergences are not enormous,
[Guest]: but in the translator's head, somewhere the strategies are different. So it's, as I said,
[Guest]: it's not about beauty. I mean, the translation has to be as beautiful as the original. That
[Guest]: goes without saying. And indeed, making it as beautiful as the original is part of the
[Guest]: process of being faithful. You can't change the pulchritude quotient, so to speak, and
[Guest]: still claim that you're true to the original, just because you're trying to maybe take across
[Guest]: the meanings of the words and the meanings of the words in a very limited sense. Because
[Guest]: what is a word? What is a sentence? It is not just its dictionary equivalent. It is
[Guest]: a rhythm, it is a sound, it is music, it is silence. What is the writer not saying in
[Guest]: the sentence? You must make sure you don't give voice to what the writer has not given
[Guest]: voice to. You must hear the silence and protect the silence. So it's a whole bunch of things.
[Guest]: And really what you are faithful to as a translator is your reading of that text. Translator is
[Guest]: the closest reader there can be of any text. I think even closer than the writer themselves.
[Unknown]: So a couple of thoughts that sort of emerged from what you just said. One is when you're
[Amit Varma]: talking about Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak's translation of Mahashweta Devi and her being
[Amit Varma]: faithful to what she felt was the academic aspects of it, even though you said Mahashweta
[Amit Varma]: Devi may not have intended those aspects. So now this brings up the question of, should
[Amit Varma]: we think of the text as something that stands apart from the author and the author's possible
[Amit Varma]: intention? For example, Ralph Mannheim said something which was quite interesting to me
[Amit Varma]: where he said, quote, translators are like actors who speak the lines as the author would
[Amit Varma]: if the author could speak English, stop quote. So, you know, so when you're translating,
[Amit Varma]: is that something at the back of your mind that what is the author's voice? How closely
[Amit Varma]: can you replicate that in a separate language? How closely can you replicate the intention?
[Amit Varma]: Or are you saying that this is the work, this is what the work means to me, and that's what
[Amit Varma]: I have to get across and keep the author out of the equation?
[Guest]: No, no, sorry. I think I didn't put that well. I don't mean at all that I am trying to take
[Guest]: across what the work means to me, leaving the author out of the equation, not at all.
[Guest]: And in fact, I don't believe that the translator should be interpreting the work in any way.
[Guest]: But what I'm getting at is that the translator still reads it and, you know, hears the text
[Guest]: and hears the voice. Now, the point is, I will be true to the voice that I'm hearing.
[Guest]: Is that the voice that the author intended? I do not know. There is actually no way of
[Guest]: knowing, right? But yeah, to the extent that I am intent on taking across the author's
[Guest]: voice the way I hear it, it is very much the author's work that I'm taking across. But
[Guest]: the interesting thing is that none of this is a deconstructed process. It's not as though
[Guest]: you have to break it down into components, okay, voice, sound, rhythm, none of that.
[Guest]: It's all fused in the text. And really, if you are led by the text, and if you're a good
[Guest]: translator, then all of these things will automatically be carried through. So you don't
[Guest]: have to worry about these things individually. When translating, you have to worry about
[Guest]: whether after you've translated, whether when you're reading it, you're getting the same
[Guest]: kind of feeling as when you read the original. That's important. You know, it's important
[Guest]: to read it to yourself, read it out loud, go back to your memory of the original text
[Guest]: and see if you're getting the same notion. If you're being carried along the same way,
[Guest]: if you stop pausing at the right place, if you're laughing at the same spot, if you're
[Guest]: crying at the same spots or not, these are important. So there's business of the effect
[Guest]: you're trying to create in the reader. Now, some language, for example, English is not
[Guest]: as effervescent a language as Bangla. Bangla can pile on metaphors one after the other,
[Guest]: and it does not even seem very weird. Try translating Tagore literally into English
[Guest]: and it will seem the most over-the-top text ever. As you can see when you read his own
[Guest]: translations, they're weird, right? I mean, no wonder he attracted labels of being a mystic
[Guest]: and so on. The original texts are anything but mystical. But once taken into English
[Guest]: because of the strange images that are created, which are not, you know, they don't flow naturally
[Guest]: from the English language, you end up with a very different notion of the text, even
[Guest]: if the words are the same. So that is where, you know, your judgment has to come in. So
[Guest]: you have to actually, when you're putting it into English, you have to actually temper
[Guest]: it down because you want ultimately to achieve a similar effect. You know, Deborah Smith,
[Guest]: who translated The Vegetarian from Korean, she was, there was a huge storm of criticism
[Guest]: of her work from Korea when they said that, oh, there are many, she's completely changed
[Guest]: the tone because Korean is a much, you know, it's like many languages from Asia. It operates
[Guest]: at a much more metaphorical level. It is a higher pitch and so on. And English, she's
[Guest]: sort of tamped it down. My point is that if you try to, you know, maintain that same pitch
[Guest]: in English, it would be hysterical. So you actually do have to tamp it down. So these
[Guest]: are the points where, you know, it's like the author is speaking out in the street and
[Guest]: you hear him in the backdrop of all the other noises. And then suddenly, you know, you're
[Guest]: translating him and you're putting him in a soundproof studio. You have to lower his
[Amit Varma]: volume. Otherwise, he's going to sound abnormally loud. This is always actually seen, you know,
[Amit Varma]: one of the things I wonder about that languages are so fundamentally different that are they
[Amit Varma]: translatable at all? For example, I was reading this excellent book by Guy Deutscher called
[Amit Varma]: Through the Language Glass. And there was a paragraph that struck me in that, quote,
[Amit Varma]: there are four tongues worthy of the world's use, says the Talmud, Greek for song, Latin
[Amit Varma]: for war, Syriac for lamentation, and Hebrew for ordinary speech. And later he writes,
[Amit Varma]: the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V, King of Spain, Archduke of Austria, and master of
[Amit Varma]: several European tongues, profess to speaking, and now quote within the quote, Spanish to
[Amit Varma]: God, Italian to women, French to men, and German to my horse, stop quote twice. And,
[Amit Varma]: you know, it's, it's always struck me that, for example, my specific bias, my specific
[Amit Varma]: taste in literature is towards minimal spare prose, which is why, you know, I like someone
[Amit Varma]: like Hemingway, but which is also why I like a lot of Japanese fiction. And one reason
[Amit Varma]: that I have speculated on why this might be so is that Japanese is just a more minimal
[Amit Varma]: languages, less flowery, it's less whatever, even more so than English in a sense. And
[Amit Varma]: equally languages like Urdu and Bengali are almost Baroque languages. There is so much
[Amit Varma]: expression. And like you said that if you were to translate something literally, from
[Amit Varma]: either Urdu or Bangla to English, it would just seem overblown, you know, the finest
[Amit Varma]: Tagore poem beautifully translated, and I've tried it myself. And if you just stay faithful
[Amit Varma]: to each of the words, and you translate them, it just sounds bad because of the aesthetic
[Amit Varma]: values inherent in the English language are very different. Exactly. So how much of a
[Amit Varma]: problem for you was this at sort of conscious level? And my other sort of related question
[Amit Varma]: goes back to what you were earlier saying about strategy and tactics, where I was reading
[Amit Varma]: an interview of Rabasa. And Rabasa was asked the same question about strategy and tactics.
[Amit Varma]: And he said, I have no strategy, it's only tactics. And perhaps there is a strategy he's
[Amit Varma]: internalized in his processes or whatever, I'm guessing. But he said, it's only tactics,
[Amit Varma]: I just go, you know, one sentence at a time, and so on. So how do you resolve that? Like
[Amit Varma]: you interestingly said that you do have a strategy when you get down to. So what's this
[Guest]: distinction between strategy and tactics? So strategy, I mean, when I say I have a strategy,
[Guest]: I would say that I have an objective. And it is internalized, it is not that it varies
[Guest]: from text to text, it is a, it is almost a philosophy of translation, or my philosophy
[Guest]: of translation, if you like, which, as I keep saying, is about being faithful to the sum
[Guest]: total of the text and the world it creates, as it is perceived by a reader. And my attempt
[Guest]: is to read it like a universal reader or like a reader of without any particular objective
[Guest]: in mind. A reader has no objective in reading, the reader is just reading. So every reader
[Guest]: as it were, so my objective is to read it like every reader, and then make sure that
[Guest]: the translation can be read by every reader with essentially the same kind of feelings
[Guest]: and notions and what they absorb and so on about it, as opposed to, let's say, I will
[Guest]: be true to making sure that every word is taken across or every metaphor is taken across
[Guest]: and so on. Now, this does not mean that you play with the text or you are reckless with
[Guest]: it. It just means that then it comes down to specific tactics at a sentence level, at
[Guest]: a word level, where you do what you think is best, keeping this overall overarching
[Guest]: objective in mind. So sometimes an idiom will render itself beautifully in another language.
[Guest]: There is no need to then say, I will not do it. Another time, it's absurd. And you say,
[Guest]: I will not do it. A third time, it's absurd. And you say, I will do it because it's so
[Guest]: picturesque and it draws up such a fantastic image that I don't want to sacrifice it, even
[Guest]: if it doesn't roll off the tongue as easily. So that's tactics, right? And then ultimately,
[Guest]: it's also not, you don't see it in isolation. You see where it stands in the scheme of the
[Guest]: sentence, the paragraph, when you're reading it afterwards, is it jumping out at you like
[Guest]: a sore thumb? Because that's something that I am completely against. You know, these islands
[Guest]: of brilliance in a text are avoidable as long as they're not there in the original. And
[Guest]: that also brings me to the point, you have to keep the flaws as well. You cannot paper
[Guest]: over the flaws. If you see something as being clunky writing, and remember that Bangla literature
[Guest]: was never edited. Only now is there a sort of semblance of editing, but nothing, there's
[Amit Varma]: no structural edits, nothing. And often, I guess it would have been written at great
[Guest]: speed for these magazines and all of that. That's right. So in fact, it's a wonder that
[Guest]: our, and it's not just Bangla, all Indian languages, it's a wonder how good these literatures
[Guest]: are, despite the fact that there is no editing. And if you're mischievous, you can always
[Guest]: say it's because there is no editing. But I mean, I don't entirely agree with that.
[Guest]: But yeah, so therefore, a lot of flaws. I mean, I would have edited Tagore, I would
[Guest]: have edited the hell out of Tagore if I were his editor in Bangla. But, you know, so then
[Guest]: you when you're translating, you have to keep some of those, not some, all, if you perceive
[Guest]: weaknesses, you have to keep them. If you see clunkiness, you have to keep it.
[Guest]: So are you deliberately recreating that clunkiness into English?
[Guest]: Absolutely. If it's there in the Bangla, absolutely. And then the editor will say, can we change
[Guest]: this? And I said, No, we can't because it's not in my control. This is what the writer
[Guest]: wrote. I can't help it. And let him let the writer be read for, you know, their warts
[Guest]: as well. Why should they be read only for what's great? So yeah.
[Amit Varma]: No, and going back to, you know, something that Emily Wilson wrote, and Emily Wilson
[Amit Varma]: wrote this in the context of Seneca, but it brought your Bengali translations to my mind
[Amit Varma]: when I read it first, where she writes on translating Seneca, quote, I had a hard time
[Amit Varma]: figuring out how much I could get away with pulling out all the stops rhetorically, because
[Amit Varma]: she writes in this wonderfully ornate purple style. It's showing off, showing off, showing
[Amit Varma]: off bombast. The risk is always that is going to come across as too silly to be impressive.
[Amit Varma]: It has to go very close to sounding silly, but without quite getting the stop code. And
[Amit Varma]: later she wrote a Twitter thread, which I'll reproduce in the show notes about all the
[Amit Varma]: sort of the difficulties of translating Odyssey, Homer's Odyssey, which she did recently. And
[Amit Varma]: part two of them might be very relevant to you, where she said that there aren't enough
[Amit Varma]: onomatopoeic words for very loud chaotic noises. And Bengali is full of these, full of it.
[Amit Varma]: Like, yeh toh jata bolshe, taki barabari hoyega lo, ha ha kode chute lo, ghatta kha kha kod
[Amit Varma]: che, gaagiri kode utlo. And you know exactly, even if you don't know the meaning, you know
[Amit Varma]: exactly what. How do you capture this flavor? Is it even possible? Or do you have to tactically
[Guest]: decide to, you know? Yeah, I've started taking more risks now, to be honest. Originally,
[Guest]: I would say, you know, I'm not going to put in words and phrases that will make no sense
[Guest]: to the reader. But now I've started trying sometimes.
[Guest]: Give me an example. So, you know, if it's ghatta kha kode utlo,
[Guest]: which is basically that I was extremely annoyed and irritated and so on. So, I might actually
[Guest]: say that, you know, an annoyed wave ran through her body or something like that, you know.
[Guest]: But actually find a way to suggest that this is how it is used in the original language.
[Guest]: And sometimes, you know, the reason I also do it, I think that if the language does not
[Guest]: have this, maybe it deserves to have it. You know, so why not introduce, because we have
[Guest]: done that, right? The English, any language grows by taking in terms for which no terms
[Guest]: exist in its own. And because we are now living in an increasingly globalized world, you don't
[Guest]: have a choice but to represent many things which are not inherently part of the culture
[Guest]: from which your language came. So, what do you do then? I mean, we do it in India all
[Guest]: the time. We're forever borrowing English words. So, why not the other way around?
[Amit Varma]: No, and in fact, translation in a sense has also been described, I forget by who, has
[Amit Varma]: also been described as a dialogue between languages. And is that something you felt
[Amit Varma]: cutely while?
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah. The good thing, perhaps the best thing about all of this discourse is that
[Guest]: you can happily get into it after the translation is done. It does not have to actually intrude
[Guest]: on the act of translating itself, because then you'd be a shit critic, you wouldn't
[Guest]: be able to finish a line if you kept putting so much thought into, so much thought of this
[Guest]: kind into it. But yeah, I'm eternally, like I have this new theory now of literature,
[Guest]: of translations and so on, which is that, I know we keep saying the original language
[Guest]: and then the target language and so on. My theory is that there is no original language
[Guest]: in which a work exists. A work exists outside of language and it springs into being in each
[Guest]: language at the time in which it is written. So, even if it so turns out that the Bengali
[Guest]: version was written first chronologically, it does not mean that the English version
[Guest]: is a version of the Bengali version. Both the Bengali and the English are versions of
[Guest]: that pure thing which exists up there, which the writer pulled out of their own head and
[Guest]: everything and put into words in a particular linguistic system. They could just as well
[Guest]: have done it in another linguistic system, depending on which one they were familiar
[Guest]: with. And that, therefore, the work does not spring up only in that one particular language.
[Guest]: It can exist in all languages. This is one of those clever, you know, things to think
[Amit Varma]: about.
[Amit Varma]: This reminds me of something Octavio Paz once said, where he said, quote, when we learn
[Guest]: to speak, we are learning to translate, stop quote, which is exactly what you just said.
[Guest]: But I'm saying that this is a slightly clever thing because I also equally will argue for
[Guest]: the fact that you cannot actually divorce the content of a text from the language. The
[Guest]: language determines the content even, you know, because certain things, you cannot put
[Guest]: it in that language, they're not in the text.
[Guest]: I agree with that, yeah.
[Guest]: And therefore, some books cannot be written in some languages. Because there's things
[Guest]: that need to go into that book, perhaps cannot be put into English, you have to write it
[Guest]: in Hindi or Bangla or Urdu. So, you know, and I'm saying that these are theories and
[Guest]: theories don't necessarily have to map on to any kind of reality. A theory is after
[Guest]: all what? It is a way of examining a phenomenon and seeing what patterns you can discern in
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: That does not mean that alternative theories cannot do an equally good job of discerning
[Guest]: patterns or explaining it. And part of the beauty of it is that you don't eventually
[Guest]: need, it's not science, so you don't need one all encompassing theory to explain it
[Guest]: because the purpose of that theory is to then also predict that if this is the input, this
[Guest]: will always be the output. And essentially, literature and art and translation are not
[Guest]: about same input producing same output. If that were the case, then every translation
[Guest]: would be the same. It's not. So, someone is mediating, someone is mediating with who knows
[Guest]: what kind of agendas that even they don't know. As a translator, I'm sure there are
[Guest]: things going on in my subconscious and unconscious that I'm not aware of. As a translator, I
[Guest]: know I've evolved, every translator evolves. So, the way you translate a text, if I were
[Guest]: to go back and translate the text that I translated 10 years ago, I am certain they would be different.
[Amit Varma]: No, and what I also find fascinating is that while you are someone who now teaches writing,
[Amit Varma]: who teaches literature, who teaches translation, you were first a practitioner. The theorizing
[Guest]: has come later.
[Guest]: The theorizing has come later, but I don't teach translation theory. I just, I mean,
[Guest]: these questions come up in the course of actually performing translations. So, then we answer
[Guest]: them and then sometimes we get carried away and start constructing theories because it's
[Guest]: fun to do and interesting things to discuss and write about. To be honest, I see translation
[Guest]: theory as a very valuable but distinct space from the practice of translation, the praxis
[Amit Varma]: of translation.
[Amit Varma]: On that note, we'll take a quick commercial break and we'll come back in a minute.
[Amit Varma]: If you're listening to the seen and the unseen, it means you like listening to audio and you're
[Amit Varma]: thirsty for knowledge. That being the case, I'd urge you to check out Storytel, the sponsors
[Amit Varma]: of this episode. Storytel is an audiobook platform that has a massive range of audiobooks
[Amit Varma]: from around the world. Their international collection is stellar, but so is a local collection.
[Amit Varma]: They have a fantastic range of Marathi and Hindi audiobooks. What's more, I do a weekly
[Amit Varma]: podcast there called The Book Club with Amit Verma, in which I talk about one book every
[Amit Varma]: week, giving context, giving you a taste of it, and so on. Download that app and listen
[Amit Varma]: to my show. And as long as Storytel sponsors this show within this commercial itself, I
[Amit Varma]: will recommend an audiobook that I liked on that platform every week.
[Amit Varma]: My recommendation for this week is Murder on the Orient Express by Agatha Christie.
[Amit Varma]: For Indians of a certain age, Agatha Christie's books are comfort food and her genial detective
[Amit Varma]: Hercule Poirot is an old friend. And Murder on the Orient Express is one of Christie's
[Amit Varma]: finest and Poirot's finest. So do check it out on Storytel. Murder on the Orient Express
[Amit Varma]: by Agatha Christie. Download the Storytel app or visit Storytel.com. Remember that Storytel
[Amit Varma]: with a single L. Storytel.com.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the seen and the unseen. I'm chatting with Aruna Vasena on the art of translation.
[Amit Varma]: And so far, we've spent a chunk of time talking about the theory of it just before we sort
[Amit Varma]: of got back just before we went to the break. So, you know, another thing that strikes me,
[Amit Varma]: and this is something that other translators across the world have pointed out, is of English
[Amit Varma]: sort of being a bridge language between languages, that very often English is the first language
[Amit Varma]: that something will be translated into. And quite often, it will become the source of
[Amit Varma]: translation for further languages. So, for example, language one is translated into English,
[Amit Varma]: and then language one is further translated into language two via the English translation.
[Amit Varma]: So English almost has a sort of a central role. And this is, of course, in the context
[Amit Varma]: of world literature, but even in the context of India, you know, English is sort of where,
[Amit Varma]: you know, there's a whole publishing industry in English. How has the ecosystem there evolved
[Amit Varma]: in terms of languages getting translated into English into each other? What is the importance
[Amit Varma]: of English in spreading, popularising our literature in other languages?
[Guest]: Sajeevan Gupta So if you mean around the world outside of
[Guest]: India, yeah, yeah. So outside of India, it is, of course, crucial, because this is it's
[Guest]: the language that your most translators working into. So it's much harder to find translators
[Guest]: who will translate, let's say, a Bangla text into French or German or Spanish, right? There'll
[Guest]: be one or two or three people. So there are only so many texts they can do. So English
[Guest]: automatically becomes the receptacle, as it were, of the translations. And then because
[Guest]: as you said, it is the language that lubricates global publishing. So people will read the
[Guest]: English version and then maybe decide to publish it in another language. And more often than
[Guest]: not, they might well use the English edition as the source, because they don't have translators
[Guest]: working between the original first and the new languages. It's not the best situation.
[Guest]: But to my mind, it's better than no situation. I mean, I always feel that any translation
[Guest]: is better than no translation. So we have to lump it even if we don't like it. In India,
[Guest]: it's the same and even worse in some ways, because people who now are genuinely biliterate
[Guest]: in two non-English languages from India are very hard to find. You had a whole bunch of
[Guest]: them earlier. For one thing, you know, there were large scale migrations in India of people
[Guest]: from particular communities into other spaces and who then had to first learn the local
[Guest]: language. So very interestingly, a legacy of that is one of the best translators working
[Guest]: from Bangla into English is actually a Tamil. His name is Ramakrishnan. But you wouldn't
[Guest]: know that except for the fact that his name is Ramakrishnan and his Bangla is fantastic.
[Guest]: And I dare say he could translate into Tamil if his Tamil was good enough. But people like
[Guest]: that are almost impossible to find. No one picks up another language anymore. At best,
[Guest]: you have to learn it to be able to go into translation and then nobody is interested
[Guest]: in going into translation, you know, between Indian languages. So, but first we are moving
[Guest]: to a situation where English will become the fulcrum and from there, you know, the arms
[Guest]: will poke out in different directions. And I feel it's better than nothing, because at
[Guest]: least there are so many good literatures in India and such fantastic books being written
[Guest]: in at least a dozen languages, that it would be a shame if they could not be read by people
[Guest]: who read other languages and don't want to read them in English or do not read English.
[Amit Varma]: And even an imperfect translation, if it conveys some of what is good about the original can
[Amit Varma]: spur the reader to look for more and maybe do the work herself. Absolutely, absolutely.
[Guest]: That's what I'm saying. A bad translation is better than no translation, quite honestly,
[Amit Varma]: if the original work is really good. And also does, you know, given that language affects
[Amit Varma]: thinking, like one, would you agree that language affects thinking as, or we'll keep saying,
[Amit Varma]: and two, would you then say that our thinking can become homogenous and Englishified if
[Amit Varma]: that becomes sort of the universal language of use? Now, I don't know if I'll be sort
[Amit Varma]: of able to express it well, but for example, one question I half seriously sometimes pose
[Amit Varma]: to people is that do Hindi speakers think differently because there isn't a semicolon
[Guest]: in the language? You know, if that makes any kind of sense. I know what you mean. But I
[Guest]: think the way I see it is that those of us who are born in India actually have the unique
[Guest]: privilege of being able to code switch fairly. At least those who also use English are able
[Guest]: to code switch at their convenience and therefore they switch to the language that best accommodates
[Guest]: their thoughts. I don't think no matter how much English spreads, our thought is limited
[Guest]: by what English can or cannot do. We very happily use words from our own language and
[Guest]: from other languages across India for that matter. And then we sort of shown them into
[Guest]: the English quite seamlessly to the extent that if you hear the way English is now spoken,
[Guest]: for example, across streets, it's quite different. In fact, you know, to me, the best example
[Guest]: of the way English is used unselfconsciously with massive borrowings from Indian words
[Guest]: is pornography. If you read in English pornography written in India, you will find that obviously
[Guest]: there is no attempt at any pristine literary values. So therefore, the word that best suits
[Guest]: the situation is used no matter which language it belongs to. While the fluid is primarily
[Guest]: English, but it's mixed with all kinds of things. It's also interesting that even English
[Guest]: is misused in the sense, for example, that instead of lay, lay as in lie down, it will
[Guest]: always be the word in English will often be sleep. So it will be a man will often say
[Guest]: write something like I slept on her. You see where it's coming from. It's very interesting
[Guest]: that the thought originates in another language and there is a sort of futile attempt to translate
[Guest]: it into the English equivalent, literally, so that you end up with a rather comic kind
[Guest]: of image if you want to, but it is fearless. The way the language is treated in pornography
[Guest]: is absolutely fearless. And because I did say there is a range of activities and impulses
[Guest]: that you're trying to portray, you cannot be sort of, you know, bowed down by the limitations
[Guest]: of your medium. So in the same way, I think the English that I hear is a brilliant combination
[Guest]: of the best of many different languages.
[Amit Varma]: And what you just said, like from the limited in the limited erotica that I have read, Indian
[Amit Varma]: erotica in English that I have read that category, I've never noticed any such thing. So which
[Amit Varma]: kind of makes me wonder that because you're looking at language so carefully being a translator,
[Amit Varma]: do you also notice all of these things?
[Guest]: Quite possibly. I think that's entirely right. And you know, it can be an annoyance sometimes
[Guest]: because you're both marvelling and being annoyed by what you're reading, no matter what. So
[Guest]: when I read English, for example, I'm always thinking, oh, man, this sentence is so good.
[Guest]: And why can't I translate a sentence as good? Whether what I'm reading is a translation
[Guest]: or not. And when I'm reading Bangla, I keep thinking, oh, no. So what if I had to translate
[Guest]: this? Would I ever be able to do it? Or what a lousy sentence, you know, how am I going
[Guest]: to put any kind of value into this sentence? So it's annoying. It's like a meta commentary
[Guest]: that is always running through your head.
[Amit Varma]: No, and just like thinking aloud, like I deplore language Nazis, because as far as I'm concerned,
[Amit Varma]: language evolves. New words come in all the time. For example, people frown on the use
[Amit Varma]: of the Indian English neologism, prepone. But I think prepone is a great word. It's
[Amit Varma]: a very elegant word for the use.
[Amit Varma]: It's a very economical word.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it's a very nice word. Why would you say it longer? And it's obvious what it means.
[Amit Varma]: And because of the sheer population of English speakers in India, is it then possible that
[Amit Varma]: the future of the English language will be driven by all the contortions which we carry
[Amit Varma]: out with the like sleeping on?
[Guest]: Maybe in India, it will, I don't think it'll spread across the world. I mean, for example,
[Guest]: here in India, we have no idea of the African flavours of English, or the Caribbean flavours
[Guest]: of English. And yet those are very, very distinct in those spaces.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, William Carlos Williams once said that I don't write in English, I write in
[Amit Varma]: the American idiom, which obviously also creates then additional problems for translators.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you've also sort of, you've translated writers from like Bong Kim, who are much older,
[Amit Varma]: you're translating people like Nauberon. And obviously, the idioms that they are writing
[Amit Varma]: in the times that they have inhabited the slang and the language they use is very, very
[Amit Varma]: different. So, how do you sort of how, how easy or hard is it to deal with something
[Guest]: like that?
[Guest]: It's not easy. I mean, it's easier to deal with modern and contemporary, it's definitely
[Amit Varma]: harder to deal with classic text.
[Amit Varma]: So when you're translating someone like Bong Kim, and a phrasing of his seems archaic in
[Amit Varma]: the original Bengali, will you then also attempt to reproduce that archaicness in the English?
[Guest]: I will not in the way in which you might read it in say, a Victorian novel or in an Arthur
[Guest]: Conan Doyle story? No, because I think that will not sit easily on me. But I will try
[Guest]: to bring out what we think of as archaic as a certain quaint elegance. And I think that
[Guest]: is what I would aim for. Yeah, so I might not use certain words, which were very prevalent
[Guest]: when you were writing in English in the 19th century. Because after all, I, you know, the
[Guest]: translation is being done in 2020, or whenever, it is not being done 100 years ago. And indeed,
[Guest]: if I read translations of those words done 100 years ago, you can see that they use what
[Guest]: is contemporary English. But see, there's this other factor there, which is this, that
[Guest]: Bungim take the first novel that he wrote in Bangla, Durgesh Nandini, which I've translated,
[Guest]: he was 26. Bungim Chandra Chattopadhyay is 26 at the time, 26. Okay, that's it. He is,
[Guest]: he has written an English novel, which has bombed, so to speak, and he himself is unsure
[Guest]: of his ideological moorings in having made that choice. So he writes this tremendously
[Guest]: racy romance. It's in the Walter Scott mold, right? It's racy, it's full of, I mean, it's
[Guest]: everything that you would want to read in a historical romance. But he's writing it
[Guest]: for a contemporary audience, although he's setting it in his past. He's setting it several
[Guest]: hundred years ago from the time he lives in, but he's still writing it in a contemporary
[Guest]: idiom. Now that contemporary idiom 100 years later appears very archaic. But am I being
[Guest]: true to that text if I were to use a very archaic mode for it? Because a 26 year old
[Guest]: writing for a contemporary audience, should I not try to create something of that effect,
[Guest]: not by being faddish, because those terms will come today and go tomorrow, but in keeping
[Guest]: some sense of modernity about it. And so you aim, therefore, for a more timeless kind of
[Guest]: approach, you know, which is where your idioms are not rooted in a particular space or time
[Guest]: or anything. But you try to bring out the notion that it should be read without the
[Guest]: degree of difficulty that we now encounter in reading the Bangla. And that's a very interesting
[Guest]: question always. And an interesting theoretical question, if you're looking at an older text,
[Guest]: which is that should you reproduce the reader's response as it was when the text came out?
[Guest]: Or should you reproduce the reader's response now if they were to read the original text?
[Guest]: And to me, frankly, reading Bumkim Chandra original in Bangla is like reading it in translation,
[Guest]: not reading a foreign language in many ways. I mean, the words may be familiar or not even,
[Guest]: but the structures, the whole flow are clearly from another era. And, you know, like they
[Guest]: say, the past is a foreign country. So it is no different from, you know, when we say
[Guest]: that this work is in Bangla, just because it uses the Bangla script and certain familiar
[Guest]: words, we are actually papering over huge differences in register. Huge, enormous. So,
[Guest]: you know, these are things to be factored in for sure.
[Amit Varma]: And, and how does it, and especially with the contemporary guys, how do you deal with
[Amit Varma]: dialogue? For example, Edith Grossman writes about dialogue, quote, dialogue contains often
[Amit Varma]: nuance or sometimes egregious indications of the class status and education of the characters,
[Amit Varma]: not to mention the intelligence and emotional state, significant intentions and sonorities
[Amit Varma]: abound in the narration and in the descriptive portions of the work. There may be elements
[Amit Varma]: of irony or satire, the rhythm of the prose, long flowing periods or short crisp phrases,
[Amit Varma]: and the tone of the writing, colloquialisms, elevated diction, pomposity, slang, elegance,
[Amit Varma]: substandard use, are pivotal stylistic devices. And it is incumbent upon the translator to
[Amit Varma]: apprehend the ways in which these instrumentalities further the purposes of the fiction, the revolution
[Amit Varma]: of character, the progress of the action, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And here it strikes me that, you know, when it comes to a novel itself, you know, I guess
[Amit Varma]: you go through that original moment of discovering what the voice is, and then you can continue
[Amit Varma]: with the authorial voice for the whole of the book once you've sort of slipped into
[Amit Varma]: that voice. But when it comes to the dialogue within a book where you have different people
[Amit Varma]: speaking in all of these different kinds of languages, in some cases written by people,
[Amit Varma]: perhaps much younger than you today in settings you haven't inhabited yourself, is that harder?
[Guest]: How do you get around that? It is. And it's not just that. It's also,
[Guest]: for example, and this is probably true of all languages in all Indian languages as well,
[Guest]: which is that you have many dialects and many local variations. And many authors are very
[Guest]: good with reproducing the speech. If you take even an urban setting, which is a confluence
[Guest]: of people of different socioeconomic backgrounds, then each one is speaking in a different register,
[Guest]: very clearly different vocabulary, different ways, pronunciations and so on. And you cannot
[Guest]: actually bring all of that into English for the simple reason that if you were to choose,
[Guest]: first of all, your choice of English dialects or versions of English would be purely random.
[Guest]: So I've actually read translations where a certain village dialect has been translated
[Guest]: into a Scottish version of English. How does that even work? Because in fact, on the contrary,
[Guest]: you're creating in the reader who identifies it as a Scottish brogue, a false sense of
[Guest]: space. It's not correct at all. So this is a very, very difficult situation, especially
[Guest]: when there's a clash. Let's say when people are speaking the same dialect, then it's not
[Guest]: such a problem because they're perfectly intelligible to each other. So even if you were to put
[Guest]: them in standard English, it would not matter. The problem is when, so you know, classic
[Guest]: thing is that the guy who drives your car is talking to you. So you're speaking a kind
[Guest]: of language which is very different from theirs. And you have to translate this while maintaining
[Guest]: the difference in register. So it gets tough. And I would say that you don't always succeed.
[Guest]: You try to do it with the words you use and so on. The other things that Irith Grossman
[Guest]: talks about, you know, rhythm, music, and so on, those are easier to, or let me put
[Guest]: it this way, if you're sensitive, if you can hear them, then you can perhaps take them
[Amit Varma]: across. In fact, you said in the past that you read
[Amit Varma]: out both the original and your translation of it to get a sense. So is it important to
[Guest]: you that rhythmically and all that? Yes, it's very important to me. That is absolutely
[Guest]: very important to me. But there again, you have problems. For example, in Bangla, it's
[Guest]: very natural to have short sentences. The same structure in English creates a tremendously
[Guest]: staccato feeling. Sometimes in Bangla, you generate tension with short sentences. In
[Guest]: English, you actually have to use a longer sentence to generate the same kind of tension.
[Guest]: So can you give me an example? So you know, this pulp writer named Shopan Kumar, whose
[Guest]: work I've translated, so his work starts, and this is almost a cliche, and may not actually
[Guest]: be there. It's like one of those excellent said, I elementary said he kind of things.
[Guest]: But it goes like, ghorite dhong dhong kore, akta bajlo. And the big joke is, if it's akta
[Guest]: one o'clock, then there should be only one, chime should be heard only once. So what is
[Guest]: this dhong dhong business and so on. Or he has things like, you know, akate bonduk, akate
[Guest]: cigarette, akate bohi nahi hai unni duklen. So other than that, so it's like, govir raat,
[Guest]: brishti pochche, rasta ekta aulok nahi. So you get the sense, right?
[Amit Varma]: In English, it's very staccato.
[Guest]: In English, you make it as, yeah, dead at night, it's raining, not a person. It does
[Guest]: not create the same kind of, but here it's almost breathless, the way it's described.
[Guest]: So you know, there, you may have to combine them into a single sentence and find a way
[Guest]: to keep it taught without using too many words. And sometimes you do that thing that many
[Guest]: English grammar najis hate, which is comma splicing, which does not exist in English,
[Guest]: right? You're supposed to use a semicolon or break it into two sentences.
[Guest]: If you want it to exist, language evolves, people use it, it's fine.
[Guest]: Now I find, in fact, I've been, one of the things I do is read translations of from European
[Guest]: text very closely to see if they're comma splicing or not. And I find that some do and
[Guest]: some don't.
[Guest]: So then I went back to the translator as it was the story. And some of them said, I hate
[Guest]: comma splicing, so I will not use it. And the other one says, no, no, the original has
[Guest]: the rhythm, so I have to use it, even if I don't do it in my own writing.
[Guest]: So people do have their quirks as well, you know, which translators' quirks also flow
[Guest]: into their work somehow. But yeah, so what she's talking about, the rhythm and music
[Guest]: and sounds, assonance, alliteration, these are still possible to manage. I mean, the
[Guest]: most brilliant exponent of this, of course, is Anthea Bell in her translations of the
[Guest]: Asterix comics. And very interestingly, her strategy, well, okay, let me not use the word
[Guest]: strategy, her method there was that she would ensure that there were as many puns on a page
[Guest]: of the English translation as there were in the original French.
[Guest]: But not necessarily the same equivalent puns or not necessarily the same words being punned
[Guest]: on. So if there was a pun in a panel, she would have a pun in the panel, but the pun
[Guest]: might be on a different word altogether, because English would adopt, accept that pun and not
[Guest]: the first one. So these are things that you have to do. But it's when people start speaking
[Guest]: in different, for example, you know, when we read the Asterix comics, we have no sense
[Guest]: of whether there's a different register that, I mean, Caesar sounds the same as, as Obelix,
[Guest]: for example, right? The only difference might be in the choice of words or in how sonorous
[Guest]: Caesar is, whereas Obelix is much more crisp or maybe excited and aggrieved for not getting
[Guest]: the magic potion. So that's how you take it across. But you cannot actually convey the
[Guest]: unstated information in used in the choice of dialect to the reader who understands and
[Guest]: many readers will not even get nuances there. All they will know that, okay, this guy is
[Guest]: not speaking standard Bangla. So therefore, from a different section, but they can't look
[Guest]: at which section or where and so on. For that, you need a tremendously more discerning ear.
[Guest]: So that information you're not always able to convey in your translation. And that's
[Guest]: a problem, perhaps, in some cases. In other cases, it may not matter, because even if
[Guest]: you convey the information, it will not mean anything to the reader.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, it seems to me that the most intense illustration of the difficulties of
[Amit Varma]: translating actually comes from poetry, like Robert Frost controversially said that poetry
[Amit Varma]: is a thing that gets lost in translation. And I was reading John Felstiner's book, Translating
[Amit Varma]: Neruda, where he talks about that experience. And he writes, quote, bring over a poem's
[Amit Varma]: ideas and images, and you will lose this manner. Imitate prosodic effects and you sacrifice
[Amit Varma]: this matter. Get the letter and you miss the spirit, which is everything in poetry, or
[Amit Varma]: get the spirit and you miss the letter, which is everything in poetry. But these are false
[Amit Varma]: dilemmas. Worse translation at its best generates a wholly new utterance in the second language
[Amit Varma]: new yet equivalent of equal value, stop quote. And have you tried your hand at poetry?
[Guest]: Yeah, I've done poetry. I've done poetry. And it is true that translating poetry is
[Guest]: a whole different ballgame. And indeed, if you keep this, that goes, and so on. And you
[Guest]: might have to make some sacrifices. But equally, I agree that you are aiming to write poetry
[Guest]: in the new language. And I would actually say that translating poetry is a little bit
[Guest]: like doing a cover version of a song, you know, where the artist's own voice and manner
[Amit Varma]: of singing will come to a good cover version will also be an original in a sense, it will
[Guest]: be an original, it will stick to the melody, but it will improvise. And it will very clearly
[Guest]: be rendered in the artist's voice and not in an attempt to replicate. I mean, those
[Guest]: covers like when you sing exactly like the original, actually, the cover versions are
[Guest]: pointless, because you might as well listen to the original then, right? Yeah, I don't
[Guest]: want to hear somebody sounding like the Beatles if they're going to do that.
[Guest]: Do you write original poetry? No, I don't. So I couldn't for the life of me, because
[Amit Varma]: I've noticed that, you know, some of the translations from Indian languages of poetry in other languages
[Unknown]: is by great poets themselves, like Arvind Krishna Mehrotra doing Kabir and Ranjit Hoskote
[Amit Varma]: Lalde. And, you know, it almost seems to me that to be able to translate, you have to
[Guest]: be a poet yourself. Yeah, except that I agree, except that I'm always worried about terms
[Guest]: like am I a poet or am I not? Because you know, you may be a poet without having written
[Guest]: a line of poetry for that matter. I mean, you may have all the qualities that a poet
[Guest]: has. The thing is, poetry also eventually is a matter of appreciating the entire holistic
[Guest]: effect of text, right? Including rhythm, including rhyme, including sound. So to that extent,
[Guest]: poetry and prose are not that far apart. But it's just that because prose is more loosely,
[Guest]: there's no structure in prose. I mean, just flowing sentence one after the other, whereas
[Guest]: poetry has a line length, it has prosody, it has certain structured effects, as it were.
[Guest]: So those are harder to put across. But very interestingly, Ranjit Hoskote's approach to
[Guest]: translating is vastly different from Arvind Krishna Mehrotra's. I mean, Arvind Krishna
[Guest]: Mehrotra rewrites poems. You know, he is actually, that's a true cover version. I mean, he brings
[Guest]: Rastafarians into Kabir, which is great. It's wonderful to read. It's perhaps also only
[Guest]: possible because there have been so many translations of Kabir. So now you can start reading these.
[Guest]: If he were to be the first translator, then Kabir would have an entirely different...
[Guest]: They'd all jump on Arvind Krishna Mehrotra also, like what are you doing? Exactly. Exactly.
[Guest]: Whereas Ranjit Hoskote was doing Lal Dede, has to be... But Ranjit brings a different
[Guest]: he is much more aware of the need to be, to put less of himself, maybe his skills, but
[Guest]: not himself, not his sensibilities as a poet, if you know what I mean.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And the other question I have, and this also, I'll probably phrase it in a clumsy
[Amit Varma]: way because I'm almost thinking aloud, is that a lot of us who are educated in English,
[Amit Varma]: certainly me, we bring our biases to the table when we read anything. So I have a certain
[Amit Varma]: way of looking at a text. For example, when I look at poetry, you know, I will value things
[Amit Varma]: like economy. I'll value things like precision of language. You know, I'll value things like
[Amit Varma]: what the specific rhythms that I'm used to thinking of as good poetry and so on and so
[Amit Varma]: forth. Ditto with prose. You know, I might have my own specific taste, but there's a
[Amit Varma]: certain sort of, even for people who haven't studied literature, just through the books
[Amit Varma]: that are considered great, there's a certain pedagogy of values that this is what is good
[Amit Varma]: and this is what is not. Now, the languages, as we discussed earlier, are so incredibly
[Amit Varma]: different. You know, in Bengali, Tagore may write in very flowery, purple, vivid prose,
[Amit Varma]: you know, a lot of subcontinental languages are certainly far more baroque than English.
[Amit Varma]: And that's definitely not a value that you look for. You know, you want to cut out all
[Amit Varma]: of that. If any word stands out, we are taught to cut it out. You don't want the language
[Amit Varma]: to draw attention to itself per se. I mean, with exceptions such as, you know, magic realism
[Amit Varma]: and whatever Rajshri does. And, you know, I'm not a huge fan of that, but that's a question
[Amit Varma]: of taste. So is how we, and here I'm not talking about translation per se, but is how we look
[Amit Varma]: at literature in languages other than English, colored by the values that we have imbibed
[Amit Varma]: through studying or being exposed to English literature? I mean, is this a problem? And
[Amit Varma]: is it, for example, something that you would face in practical terms that say you're translating
[Amit Varma]: something from Bengali to English and is beautiful in the original and you're recreating its
[Amit Varma]: essence in English. And therefore it is not precisely how a writer in English would write
[Amit Varma]: it or consider good, but it still makes sense to you. How do you look at all of this?
[Guest]: Yeah, no, I agree completely. And I think my personal aesthetic is also one toward one
[Guest]: that absorbs excessiveness, excesses of any kind. So it's a hard balance, but at the same
[Guest]: time, you can't also completely strip the original text of its decorations or ornaments
[Guest]: and so on. But it's just that the way I look at it is that what is this place of those
[Guest]: decorations and embellishments in the original language. And sometimes when that becomes
[Guest]: the norm, then its effect is actually much lower because it is not standing out. You're
[Guest]: used to this sort of slightly exaggerated form, right? Everyone is, as I said, ghor
[Guest]: kha kha kochcha always. No one will say ghor ta khali chilo, which is a more prosaic way
[Guest]: of putting it. So when you encounter that all the time, you are actually all you're
[Guest]: hearing is ghor ta khali chilo, nothing more than that. So it's fine then. You don't, there's
[Guest]: no embellishment that you need to carry across. At other times, you see genuinely wonderful
[Guest]: prose. Someone has really come up with something fantastic. And then you, then you sometimes
[Guest]: you keep taking it into the new language and see, is it creating the same effect? Does
[Guest]: it seem overblown or even under? Sometimes you may have not pitched it high enough. So
[Guest]: you tweak. But you have to be sensitive to the natural tone of the language into which
[Guest]: you're translating. And therefore, where a particular sentence stands with in relation
[Guest]: to the natural tone of that language is where your translated sentence should stand in relation
[Guest]: to the natural tone of that language. And the two natural tones may be quite different.
[Guest]: Therefore, you will have to choose. But the relationship between the natural tone and
[Guest]: that sentence should be the same, more or less. That's what I look at.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I was struck by an example Rabasa gave of an exercise he carried out in his
[Amit Varma]: class where and I don't remember the two languages involved. One of them was obviously English.
[Amit Varma]: The other would have been Spanish, I guess. And he handed out a text to one student who
[Amit Varma]: had to translate from Spanish to English. Next student had to translate that translation
[Amit Varma]: back and so on all the way back to down the line. And then they would look at the final
[Guest]: English version with the first English version and sort of compare. I've done that in my
[Guest]: classes. You've done that in your class as well. So what have you found? So, you know,
[Guest]: the divergence is less than I had thought. Oh, yeah. I thought it was like Chinese whispers.
[Guest]: It would have been altered tremendously. Not quite so much. But you can see that it's not
[Guest]: so much the writing that's different as the reading that's different. So two people have
[Guest]: read the same word differently and therefore have written it in different ways or the same
[Guest]: phrase differently. So really, the divergences come in the way in your reading. And in your
[Guest]: reading comes your relationship with the language as well. You know, in fact, this is another
[Guest]: very interesting point, which is that in the West, most people translate from a language
[Guest]: that they have learnt into the language they live in, which is English. In our case, most
[Guest]: of us translate from a language we live in. And English also we live in, in some senses
[Guest]: in India, but perhaps the English we live in is not the English we translate into entirely.
[Guest]: So because sometimes when you're translating into English, you're always thinking of an
[Guest]: international audience as well. So because of this difference, we are perhaps better
[Guest]: readers of the text than many Western translators are. But I guess they may be better writers.
[Guest]: It's possible because they live their entire lives in English, right? We don't. Even despite
[Guest]: our comfort and our familiarity with the English language, many parts of our lives are not
[Guest]: lived in English at all. Whether it's your daily transactions, sometimes your thoughts,
[Guest]: your most instinctive responses to something are often not in English, right? So we end
[Guest]: up translating, I think, in a different way, which somehow I think is a little closer to
[Guest]: the original text because we're reading it better and we're internalising it more. So
[Guest]: the English that we reproduce it in will inevitably, I think, have more of the flavours of the
[Guest]: original language, like it or not, than in the case of someone translating from say a
[Guest]: French or a Spanish into. Of course, there's also the point that those languages are far
[Guest]: more similar. Here, English comes from a completely different space. If you were translating from
[Guest]: Hindi to Bengali, for example, it would not nearly be such a, as much of a leap.
[Amit Varma]: No, and in fact that, you know, so there I'm thinking, for example, an American writer
[Amit Varma]: who lives in Calcutta and learns Bengali will come up with a very different kind of translation
[Amit Varma]: as someone like you would, who, you know, will find the sort of the familiar equivalent
[Guest]: idiom in English much more. Yeah. And also, also perhaps have a better sense of what that
[Guest]: where the text is, the original text is going beyond its dictionary meaning. And something
[Amit Varma]: you said was interesting to me, which is, you know, when you said that we don't necessarily
[Amit Varma]: translate in the same English we use, because it's also the question of an international
[Amit Varma]: audience. Is that a consideration for you? Like when you translate, are you thinking
[Amit Varma]: of audience or are you just thinking, okay, let me capture the joy that I feel?
[Guest]: Primarily let me capture the joy that I feel, but when I'm validating that joy, I have to
[Guest]: figure out whether it will register with the reader. And that point you start thinking,
[Guest]: maybe not when the, when you're actually translating, but when you're reading, revising, you have
[Guest]: to question your decisions to see someone who does not come armed with the same body
[Guest]: of knowledge that you have, what it will mean to them is some, is a question you must.
[Amit Varma]: So let's talk about your process now. Like, what is your process? Like when you get a
[Amit Varma]: book, like first, I assume you will only translate books you enjoy reading is my guess. Or are
[Guest]: you sometimes given a book?
[Guest]: Sometimes I do get commissioned books, which are not necessarily books I would translate
[Guest]: by choice. And I do it for various reasons, because increasingly I've discovered that
[Guest]: this business of what I like is a little idiosyncratic, because as a translator, you also sort of
[Guest]: have a responsibility towards the entire body of literature being produced in a language,
[Guest]: or all its in all its variations and diversity. It is also important, increasingly, as we've
[Guest]: learned that some voices need to be amplified.
[Amit Varma]: Are you saying that because there aren't too many translators from Bengali to English allowed
[Amit Varma]: and around, therefore, the responsibility is more on you?
[Guest]: Well, no, no, no, I mean, there are more translators actually from Bengali to English than perhaps
[Guest]: from any other language, to be honest. No, it's not more on me personally. But I'm just
[Guest]: saying on all of us, on all of us, because the fact is that we are not as many as there
[Guest]: are writers. So although it takes less time to perhaps translate than to write a book,
[Guest]: but the thing is that you can't always go with only your personal taste 100%. That's
[Guest]: all I'm saying. Because then important books, which you may not like, not all important
[Guest]: books are books you may like, but they need to be translated for, let's say they come
[Guest]: from an underrepresented voice, or they increasingly, for example, I've tried to make, I mean, over
[Guest]: the past couple of years, I'm trying to get to a point where I say for every book I translate
[Guest]: by a man, I will translate one by a woman also. So I want to ensure that 50% representation
[Guest]: in my ongoing work. So sometimes, you know, when one picks up books that are important
[Guest]: that you know need to be read, without it being a book that you personally would enjoy.
[Amit Varma]: And does it expand you translating a book that you wouldn't otherwise have liked?
[Guest]: Absolutely, absolutely. And sometimes what I do is, so this is interesting, very increasingly
[Guest]: now I don't read the book through before translating it. Oh, yeah, I did a little bit and then
[Guest]: I get into it. And I discovered the book as I'm going along. And while I can be cute and
[Guest]: sort of say things like it reproduces the first reaction of the reader, when they're
[Guest]: not familiar with the text and so on. The fact is that I enjoy it because I am actually
[Amit Varma]: discovering the story as I'm going along. So you read enough to get the voice and then
[Guest]: you just yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. So starting with that is where I put the most effort really
[Guest]: in doing the first few pages to make sure that I've got the voice. Once you feel you've
[Guest]: got it, then I move very quickly. Because you always worried what if the voice leaves
[Guest]: you at some point, or do you allow yourself to be distracted by other things, and then
[Guest]: it's gone. That is, in fact, one of the toughest things because you also have to live at the
[Guest]: same time, you're not just writing for people like us, we also have to do our day jobs,
[Guest]: whatever they might be. So you have to inhabit the book very, very obsessively while you're
[Guest]: translating it. I guess that's true of a writer as well, they have to inhabit whatever they're
[Amit Varma]: writing. And is there and again, this is true of everyone, writers, translators, anybody
[Amit Varma]: who does anything, is there a trade off between getting it right and getting it done? So do
[Amit Varma]: you sort of like if you have a particularly problematic passage or a para or a bit of
[Amit Varma]: dialogue and you're not sure what to do, do you just do it as best as you can literally
[Guest]: and say, I'll come back to it later. Yes. And move on in the draft. Absolutely. I do
[Guest]: not allow the flow to be impeded by anything. I mean, I very often leave entire chunks in
[Guest]: the original without even translating because I know that that's going to engage a different
[Guest]: part of my mind. And I don't want to suddenly change the rhythm of my writing at this point.
[Guest]: So I do that. Yeah. Words, phrases, paragraphs. Sometimes I translate very literally knowing
[Guest]: that I will come back to this, but the structure is so complex that I don't want to pause it
[Guest]: right now. So in fact, that's one of the tricks we do in our translation class. And then when
[Guest]: sentences prove very difficult to translate, we do an actual word by word rendition, which
[Guest]: comes up quite beautifully as poetry almost. Because, you know, the syntax is mangled in
[Guest]: English. Give me an example if you can think about it. So, you know, if you take a long
[Guest]: sentence like a lullaby. Right. And you're trying, you're struggling with the rhythm
[Guest]: of that in English and you're trying to compose it entirely in your head before you put it
[Guest]: down and it's proving impossible. So then I tell the class, OK, let's just put down
[Guest]: each word the way it is. So it's goom, sleep, parani, put, sleep, put, aunt. And as I go
[Guest]: even more literal, mother, sister, father, sister, our house come. OK. And then they've
[Guest]: suddenly got a skeleton. It's OK. Now let's play with this and see what interesting things
[Guest]: we can do. Just like a hack to release the mind. Yeah, it's a hack to release the mind.
[Guest]: Exactly. So that you know, because you're not struggling with structure and meaning
[Guest]: at the same time. So you get the meaning out literally word for word. So now you know what
[Guest]: words you have to capture. Now you find the right structure for it that will. So these
[Guest]: things happen sometimes, you know, and they're quite interesting exercises. And they sometimes
[Guest]: alert you to the richness of that original text. Because what we tend to do when we read
[Guest]: is that we abstract the meaning and we tend to forget about other things. Right. So that's
[Guest]: why one of the exercises I do with my class is I make them translate birdsong. Wow. So
[Guest]: the whole idea behind birdsong is that there is no meaning. You have to translate sounds.
[Guest]: And let your minds just put words to these sounds and then they create beautiful situations
[Guest]: around those. What I also make them translate from languages they don't know and I don't
[Guest]: know. Oh, okay. Yeah. So you know, almost none of us knows Norwegian or Swedish. So
[Guest]: I take Swedish text and say translate. What the hell is this? I don't care. Just translate.
[Guest]: Look at the text and do an English and then it opens, unlocks different parts of their
[Guest]: mind where they try to, from sounds or from, okay, this is a short word, it may be a verb
[Guest]: and so on. And they come up with something that is a quotient structure, which may not
[Guest]: have any relationship in terms of significance with the original, but it alerts you to the
[Guest]: fact that there is so much more to text than its bare dictionary meaning of each word.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, now I'll completely digress and ask about teaching. Yeah. That, you know,
[Amit Varma]: how do you learn this pedagogy? You know, what do I teach? How do I teach? You know,
[Amit Varma]: you are basically before this, you are a doer. Yeah. You know, your strategy is internalized.
[Unknown]: You are handling things tactically. Suddenly you have to teach a class and you've got all
[Amit Varma]: these interesting methods. Yes. So number one, how do you devise these methods? And
[Amit Varma]: number two, in this process, does it change the way you see your translation or do your
[Guest]: translation? Yeah. Great, great question. So my first, and this is something that I've
[Guest]: only managed to, I can articulate some of this now because I've thought about it. Again,
[Guest]: I've gone, I'm an organic translator and I'm an organic teacher of translation. So my idea
[Guest]: of teaching translation is let's translate. Let's not talk about it. And let's see what
[Guest]: problems come up in the course of translation. So I still follow that. I just plunge people
[Guest]: into it. And as I was telling you, I plunge people into it, not just in terms of meaning,
[Guest]: but also both in terms of trying to capture all the richness of a text that exists outside
[Guest]: of the dictionary meaning of the words and simultaneously also practice different forms
[Guest]: of rendition. For example, one of the exercises I said to them is we'll do, let's do a feminist
[Guest]: translation of a text where you're obviously allowed to play much more with the content,
[Guest]: but you are true to a certain vision you have of the end product. So eventually you will
[Guest]: marry the two where you will have a vision and you will have a sense of what the original
[Guest]: text is. But first let's do them as separate exercises without being hamstrung by the need
[Guest]: to do both at the same time. So, yeah, in fact, my classes, I do two or three things.
[Guest]: For example, one of the things I do is I hand out a sheet, which is a combination of paragraphs
[Guest]: of translated text and text written originally in English. And I ask them to identify which
[Guest]: ones do you think are translations and which ones are not.
[Guest]: And can they possibly do that?
[Guest]: No, even I couldn't. The first time the exercise was given to me, I couldn't either. Then the
[Guest]: point of the exercise is just that, that there is actually when you read the final thing,
[Guest]: you're not, there's no difference, right? So let's not worry about some, you know, the
[Guest]: anxieties of a translated text. A well translated text, no one will be able to tell apart from
[Guest]: an original. So that's one exercise. Second exercise, as I mentioned, was things like
[Guest]: birdsong and so on. The third exercise is that we translate, we translate pictures,
[Guest]: you know, from movie scenes into scripts. So the whole idea is, can you see something
[Guest]: visually and put words to it if the words are not there for you to begin with?
[Guest]: Wow, that's so fascinating.
[Guest]: Yeah. So then they do that. So that ultimately teaches them to read the text also for the
[Guest]: visuals that are out there without only worrying about. Sometimes, you know, you lose the sight
[Guest]: of the wood for the trees. And as a translator, you can't really do that. Rather you have
[Guest]: to do both. You both have to go so down deep that you are looking only at the trees and
[Guest]: even the wood. But then the entire wood must also, the forest must also be coming alive
[Guest]: to you at the end of what you've done in the same way that it was there in the original.
[Guest]: Other than that, my job is really to teach them to fall in love. How do you teach someone
[Guest]: to fall in love? You can't, right? But you can create the conditions for them to fall
[Amit Varma]: in love.
[Amit Varma]: You recreate the joy, which it seems to me that you are doing because I am now tempted
[Guest]: to just go and see a movie scene and try to do this. It's so exciting.
[Guest]: So that's the thing. You recreate the conditions in which you will fall in love, right? You
[Guest]: bring the chocolate and you bring the lovely person and you put them in the right frame
[Guest]: of mind. But then you step back and say, OK, now if the magic has to happen, it will happen.
[Guest]: These are the primary tasks of my teaching. Once that is done, then it boils down to,
[Guest]: as we said, you know, specific questions that keep cropping up in the course of the text.
[Guest]: And I teach translation without knowing the languages from which they're translating.
[Guest]: And my point to them is that this is not a mathematics class. We are not testing for
[Guest]: accuracy. That is, as a translator, that's your responsibility. No one can teach you
[Guest]: how to do an accurate translation. I mean, in this day and age, it's not difficult at
[Guest]: all. You will always get the meaning of every word. One of the translator's greatest tools
[Guest]: today, by the way, and I'm very grateful for this, is Google Images.
[Guest]: Because sometimes you don't know what the hell is this word, but then you put it into
[Guest]: Google in the original language and you click on the images tab and you say, oh, that's
[Guest]: what it is. I had no idea. And then you say, OK, now I figured out what it stands for.
[Guest]: Yeah. So it's a huge, Google Images is a huge leap.
[Amit Varma]: This is a fantastic hack. I just feel so excited. I'm learning so much. So how long does it
[Amit Varma]: and how do you balance the sort of personal and it's not even the professional because
[Amit Varma]: it's not your profession. How do you balance the regular rhythm of your life, which includes
[Amit Varma]: everything else and the translation that you take on? And would it be different if translation
[Amit Varma]: was your day job?
[Guest]: Yeah. So it is my profession in the sense that it may not be my profession financially,
[Guest]: but in every other sense, it's my profession. It's the one that I give.
[Amit Varma]: It's a calling.
[Guest]: It's my almost my identity now, primarily identity. Would it be different? Yes. I mean,
[Guest]: I often fantasize about that, although I would not now not give up teaching for anything,
[Guest]: but I still fantasize about a life of being only a literary translator. So in that life,
[Guest]: I would be, so here's how my day would go. I would wake up in the morning and I would
[Guest]: translate into Bangla first thing in the morning, which I do now. I've translated one book and
[Guest]: I'm going to be doing more. So first thing in the morning for about two hours, when my
[Guest]: mind is freshest after sleep, say from about six to eight, I would translate into Bangla.
[Guest]: Then I would go for a walk, a long walk and have breakfast, then come back and then work
[Guest]: on the main text that I'm translating for about four hours. So say till about one o'clock
[Guest]: or so. Nap for 20 minutes, wake up and read. Read English.
[Amit Varma]: What kind of Bengali naps for 20 minutes?
[Guest]: No, I'm a bad Bengali in that sense. Yeah. So let's not call it a nap. I mean, let's
[Amit Varma]: just, you know, shut my eyes.
[Amit Varma]: Relax.
[Guest]: I would read for a couple of hours, then translate again, but a different text. I would always
[Guest]: be working on three texts. One into Bangla and one in the morning and one in the evening.
[Guest]: And I'd knock off work by about eight o'clock or so and watch a film at night. That would
[Amit Varma]: be my
[Amit Varma]: That's your fantasy.
[Guest]: Yeah, fantasy, no socialising, mind you. I mean, this is almost
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's what I was wondering, why are you working till eight? I thought you'll work
[Guest]: till five in the evening, you chill out with your friends and all that.
[Guest]: I don't know. I mean, friends and all that happens anyway. I can't deal with meeting
[Amit Varma]: people every day.
[Guest]: All the more reason I'm so grateful that you've come here today.
[Guest]: This is different.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, socially, I mean, every day is out of the question.
[Amit Varma]: Fair enough. And so, you know, going back to the process, how long does it take you
[Guest]: to translate a typical book?
[Guest]: So depends on the length, of course, but my I aim to translate 3000 words a day in translation.
[Guest]: So if it's a middle, medium sized book of about 60,000 words, it'll take me 20 days
[Guest]: of 3000 words each, which eventually even inevitably becomes a month or so, because
[Guest]: you don't achieve 3000 words every day. So yeah, it's I mean, I average, let's say, 50
[Guest]: to 60,000 words a month.
[Amit Varma]: Fantastic. And did you also sort of, like you mentioned that your first translation
[Amit Varma]: when you were in college, when you were working rather at that magazine was one of Shankar's
[Amit Varma]: stories, and he liked it, and he asked you to translate Chaurangi, which you did. So
[Amit Varma]: do you have a lot of interaction with the writers themselves? What do they feel about
[Unknown]: the work?
[Guest]: Fortunately, no. Well, fortunately, and unfortunately, because I'm sure it would benefit I would,
[Guest]: the work would benefit from these interactions. But see, here's the thing, most Bengali writers
[Guest]: are not so able to read the English in a way that will tell them whether it's a good translator.
[Guest]: I mean, they'll get a sense of it, but it won't go beyond that. Many of them are not
[Guest]: interested. A third chunk are dead. So between them, I have had almost nobody look closely
[Guest]: at a translation or so on. Once in a while, I've asked questions, but not too often.
[Amit Varma]: And, and in the general, like one of the, you know, when I was reading interviews of
[Amit Varma]: translators, a really common complaint is that is about the reviews, that either the
[Amit Varma]: review won't even mention that it is a translation or talk about the translation, or in some
[Amit Varma]: cases, a reviewer will say, well, I don't know the original language, so I cannot comment,
[Amit Varma]: which according to Grossman, among others, is an inadequate response, because it's not
[Amit Varma]: about precision of translation, it's about whatever you're creating. And translators
[Amit Varma]: are often translators often feel that reviewers and many people in the general public as well,
[Amit Varma]: don't really understand what they have done. They think that is like you're putting a bit
[Amit Varma]: of tracing paper, say on a painting and you're kind of, but it's not that it's a it's an
[Amit Varma]: act of recreation. And people don't often get this. Is that something you feel frustrated
[Amit Varma]: by that? I mean, I know you won all these awards, and so on the crossword award for
[Amit Varma]: translation twice, and so on. But is that something that sort of frustrates you that
[Amit Varma]: you know, your translation doesn't get the kind of recognition it deserves? Perhaps you
[Amit Varma]: don't get the kind of advances you deserve, so on and so forth?
[Guest]: No, no, it doesn't frustrate me, doesn't frustrate me at all. Because I really see the translator
[Guest]: as being a transparent individual. They do their job, but you know, the real, I mean,
[Guest]: I'm happy if someone reads the book and says they liked it. That's, that's good enough
[Guest]: for me, because then I know I've done a good job. And that's all that matters, whether
[Guest]: they're saying you've done a good job, or the review says it or so on, is immaterial
[Guest]: to me. And really, I think that too much, I mean, I know there are all the movements
[Guest]: like Name the Translator, and so on, which are all good, and so on. But they distract,
[Guest]: I think, in some ways, they're not crucial to the quality of translations, they're not
[Guest]: crucial to ensuring that more translations are read, they're not crucial to ensuring
[Guest]: the more translations are published, none of those, you know, feed into those important
[Guest]: things. I think that's what the translator community should be fighting for. Certainly,
[Guest]: the money would be useful. But again, how much money do writers make either? So to be
[Guest]: honest, you can't complain. The trick for, if you live in India, the trick for you is
[Guest]: actually to try to get published in the West as a translator. Because then the fees that
[Guest]: you get are actually very handsome. Certainly, they're very handsome by Indian standards,
[Guest]: but they're also pretty, I mean, I'll tell you brass tacks. It's very simple. In the
[Guest]: UK, you get paid 90 pounds per 1000 words, per 100 words. So, no, 1000 words. So 50,000
[Guest]: would give you, yeah, that's right, per 1000 words. So let's say if you were translating
[Guest]: even a slim book of 50,000 words, you're talking about 4,500 pounds. 4,500 pounds is almost
[Guest]: four and a half lakh rupees. In India, that goes a long way. You're certainly not going
[Guest]: to get an advance of four and a half lakh rupees for a translation. I mean, the best
[Guest]: advance you will get is maybe a lakh. And that too, if a publisher is trying to break
[Guest]: into a market, when they're already settled, they will not pay that kind of advance.
[Amit Varma]: So many young people are listening to this episode, excited by everything you have said
[Guest]: so far, wanting to be translators, and you've just brought them crashing down.
[Guest]: Yeah, well, if you, if you, I mean, my point is that I don't think you can actually be
[Amit Varma]: a great artist if you're given the money.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but you have to do it for the love of it.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's not going to happen. And almost conversely, if you, the more you do it for
[Guest]: the love of it, the more money you will make. And the more happy you will be because you're
[Guest]: not expecting anything to begin with. But it is also, I think, you know, we also have
[Guest]: locked ourselves into a kind of consumer lifestyle, which perhaps if you're really serious about
[Guest]: being a translator, and today's generation is actually quite different in that sense.
[Guest]: They're far more, they want to live far more lightly. So it could be possible. I wouldn't
[Guest]: make it. In fact, I know, an Italian, translated into Italian, Joya, I'll just call her Joya,
[Guest]: strangely Indian sounding name. She's used to spend half a year in India, because it
[Guest]: was cheaper to live in India, given what she was earning.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I've met her. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Fine lady. Yeah. Yeah. So, you know, given everything
[Amit Varma]: you just said about not being social and all of that, and you have translation to get back
[Amit Varma]: to, I'm very grateful you gave me so much time, I won't take much more of it. Final
[Amit Varma]: question, something that listeners of my show often ask me for, and I think the part of
[Amit Varma]: the show that they enjoy the most is when my guest is recommending books for them to
[Amit Varma]: read. And in this case is particularly pertinent, because it's your whole life. So a dual question,
[Amit Varma]: really. One is that out of those who are translated, whom you've translated and even otherwise,
[Amit Varma]: who are the writers you really, really love who means something to you. And apart from
[Amit Varma]: that, if you had to sort of recommend three works that you have translated that you're
[Amit Varma]: particularly proud of, not just as translations, but you feel they are great books, you feel
[Amit Varma]: everyone should read this, you know, what would they be?
[Guest]: Okay, so as for the writers, are you talking about writers only who write in Bangla?
[Amit Varma]: Let's stay with Bangla, because other guests will recommend other people.
[Guest]: Sure. Yeah. So in Bangla, I think the people to really read are Mahasheta Devi, for sure.
[Guest]: And the brilliant thing about Mahasheta Devi is that her work will remain alive. I'm not
[Guest]: going to use a word like relevant, because that is too narrow. Her work will remain alive
[Guest]: for many generations to come. So Mahasheta Devi, her son, Naubarun Bhattacharya, whose
[Guest]: writing has this manic energy, which you would not think literature capable of actually holding,
[Guest]: leave alone conveying.
[Amit Varma]: Was he particularly hard to translate? Or was he energising?
[Guest]: He was tremendously energising. And in fact, there's been a newer translation of that book
[Guest]: by Shunandini Mukherjee at Seagull, and hers is even better. It's not even, it's actually
[Guest]: better than mine, because I think she's taken off where I left off, as it were. So, you
[Guest]: know, she's gone out more on a limbo over there to reproduce that energy and that sense
[Guest]: of manic adventure that this text contains. So these two, for sure, I would recommend
[Guest]: Asha Punnadevi, because she has this incredible ability to locate her stories within these
[Guest]: four walls, and home in on the aspects of human beings, which we tend not to look at,
[Guest]: because we all tend to think of human beings as being very noble people, right? We're noble
[Guest]: and we're always striving to be better versions of ourselves and so on. And she just goes
[Guest]: in at the pettiness and the weaknesses and the foibles and the way they create discord
[Guest]: in the tightness and the claustrophobic kind of spaces that middle class families live
[Guest]: in. It's fascinating. And she's able to do, I mean, she has written over, what, I think
[Guest]: two or 3000 stories. Great literature for me takes me to, this is something Nadeem Aslam
[Guest]: said, and I completely love what he said. He said, it takes you to a place where you've
[Guest]: never been before. And when you go there, you feel I've lived here all my life.
[Guest]: Wow.
[Guest]: Yeah. So that's exactly what she does. It's fantastic. So her, definitely. Let's see who
[Guest]: are the others. There are writers like Shruthi Nath Bhaduri, who used to live in, you know,
[Guest]: many of the Bengali writers who wrote in the first half of the 20th century, actually lived
[Guest]: and grew up in what is Bihar now. So Shruthi Nath Bhaduri was one of them. Shruthi Nath
[Guest]: Bhaduri has this fantastic book called Doraichorit Manosh, which is, as you can make out from
[Guest]: the name, a take off on the Ramcharitmanas, and Dora is the name of the place. It's an
[Guest]: extraordinary book. And it's been translated, fortunately. So him, Shundipan Chattopadhyay,
[Guest]: who was one of those plotless writers, who arrived at this fantastic vignettes of human
[Guest]: behaviour, and always with the sense that you were looking at something deeper than
[Guest]: you thought. And in the most, amidst squalor, amidst middle class meanness, middle class
[Guest]: poverty and so on, and yet very strongly informed by human desire, which is somewhat unusual
[Guest]: for Indian literatures, you know, where the human desire doesn't play a very big part.
[Guest]: And desire in a very cheap, tawdry way, not even particularly poetic or anything. Very
[Guest]: real, therefore. Anita Agnihotri, who writes from her own experiences as a bureaucrat,
[Guest]: although she writes in Bangla, her fiction is said all over India.
[Guest]: I think you got the 2011 Crossword Award for translating her work.
[Guest]: So her works are quite amazing, and especially because they take you out of your known spaces,
[Guest]: and they actually sensitize you to politics, to social fault lines, to poverty, to living
[Guest]: conditions and so on. Always looks at those stories through what human beings are doing.
[Guest]: I mean, they're not bland treatises, he's not throwing data at you, or anything like
[Guest]: that. So these people for sure. And I would actually say Tagore's short stories, they
[Guest]: really are something.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, some of them are already part of the popular culture in such a way that it almost
[Guest]: seems cliched like Abliwala.
[Guest]: Yeah, exactly. But there are a whole bunch of others which are, you can, there's so much
[Guest]: you can get out of if you wanted to do a feminist reading of Tagore's stories, for example,
[Guest]: but written by, so was he an ally? The question is, forget about whether he was a feminist,
[Guest]: was he an ally? Here's this very upper middle class, very privileged person. Was he an ally
[Guest]: or was it sort of pretense of understanding? So there are very many important critical
[Guest]: questions you can throw at his stories, and you will always come back. And you don't necessarily
[Guest]: have to say, the answer is not always yes. But the point is, he's engaging, he's engaging
[Guest]: with all these things. And even if his viewpoint is not one you agree with, you are grateful
[Guest]: that he's engaging with it and he's raising the question back in that day, back in that
[Guest]: day in and framing them in a way that the questions remain relevant now, whatever your
[Guest]: answers may be. He framed them in a tremendously modern or, I would say, out of time, you know,
[Guest]: in a way that does not, cannot be pinned down to a particular time or social system or anything.
[Guest]: In Bangladesh, there are these great writers. And in fact, that I can segue into the next
[Guest]: question for that. I've finished the translation, which is going to be published later this
[Guest]: year of Akhtaruz Zaman Ilyas's Khwab Nama, which to me is the most mind-blowing novel
[Guest]: I've ever read.
[Guest]: Tell me a bit about it.
[Guest]: Khwab Nama is set in just before and just after independence and partition. It's set
[Guest]: in a village cluster in the north of what is now Bangladesh. It is set in the background
[Guest]: of the Tehbaga movement. So it's a confluence of many streams. You have the Tehbaga movement
[Guest]: going on where farmers are agitating for their rights to the land. They want it to be Tehbaga
[Guest]: three parts and they want two thirds of the takings. You have the whole independence or
[Guest]: rather the partition track. So you have, therefore, the Hindu-Muslim track. You have oppression.
[Guest]: You have personal desire. You have magical realism, because things are happening that
[Guest]: cannot quite be explained. You have hunger in a very big way. Food and hunger is such
[Guest]: an important part of that book. And there is this one character who doesn't have a name.
[Guest]: He's called Tameez's father, Tameez-e-Baap. And Tameez-e-Baap is perpetually hungry and
[Guest]: he can put away enormous quantities of food and he becomes a mythical figure eventually.
[Guest]: And it is written in, you know, it's written in a way that is, you almost feel like, no,
[Guest]: how can a person have so many perspectives in the same novel? And it is not conscious.
[Guest]: It's not that he's telling the story through X's eye or Y's eye or Z's eye or anything,
[Guest]: but he just, he seamlessly, you know, shifts his, the camera seamlessly shifts his position.
[Guest]: And it's an extraordinary work. So both in literary terms and in terms of being a document
[Guest]: of, so Akhtaruzaman L.A.S. wrote just two novels in his life. He wrote this one and
[Guest]: his second novel, his first novel was called Chile Kota Shepai, The Soldier in the Attic.
[Guest]: And he developed cancer while he was writing his second novel, and he died soon after finishing
[Guest]: it. It's almost like he willed himself to finish the novel before he died. And he wrote
[Guest]: a bunch of short stories.
[Amit Varma]: Have you translated that one also?
[Guest]: No, but I may. I mean, there is another translator from Bangladesh who's very keen, but he says
[Guest]: he doesn't have the time. And if it turns out that he doesn't have the time, then I'm
[Amit Varma]: going to do it. Otherwise, he will do it.
[Guest]: Any other translations of yours you'd like to recommend? What are your sentimental favourites?
[Guest]: Well, sentimental favourite would be Buddhadeb Bose's When the Time is Right. It's just an
[Guest]: extraordinary piece of writing. It's not so much the story or anything, it's an extraordinary
[Guest]: piece of writing, but it is a very real, it's set in, again, just before independence, it's
[Guest]: set at a time when the old order of the Bengali aristocracy is crumbling, and there's lots
[Guest]: of money because of the war, and a newer bunch of Bengalis are rising. And yet they are associated
[Guest]: by the aristocracy with being crude, and money is after all vulgar, and so on. So there's
[Guest]: this very interesting clash between these two worldviews, but told beautifully through
[Guest]: the story of one family, one family with a gentleman whose wife dies after giving birth
[Guest]: to their fifth daughter. So there are five sisters in this story, but only one of them
[Guest]: is pivotal, the youngest one. It's a love story as well. But I'm most interested in
[Guest]: the third part of the novel, which is almost half of the novel, which is a description
[Guest]: of one night, not even one night of four or five hours of a wedding. And it's this grand
[Guest]: wedding that is taking place under the specter of the Japanese about to bomb Calcutta or
[Guest]: fears that they might bomb Calcutta. And it's almost the last fling of the old aristocracy
[Guest]: before they know that they will be eclipsed. And the writing is like a camera moving in
[Guest]: and out of rooms. And it moves between, I mean, you know, it goes up to two people who
[Guest]: are having a conversation. Halfway through a sentence, I don't want to hear anymore.
[Guest]: It moves on and catches the second half of a sentence somebody else is uttering somewhere.
[Guest]: And so in this way, it's sort of, you know, restlessly circulating around the whole space
[Guest]: and making you see and listen to what's going on. So it's like a plotless film, almost in
[Guest]: words, quite remarkable.
[Amit Varma]: Wow, I can't wait to read all these books.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I will make sure I get these books across to you.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, I'm going to pick them up. Please don't get them across to me. Let the royalties
[Amit Varma]: go where they should. You know, thank you so much. This has been such an enriching discussion
[Guest]: for me. Thanks so much for your time.
[Guest]: Thank you, Amit. I mean, I don't think I've had a better chat on translating ever.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, do head on over to Amazon and just search
[Amit Varma]: for Arunabha's name. A whole bunch of magnificent books will pop up, including the ones he just
[Amit Varma]: named. You can follow him on Twitter at Arunabha. That's just his name. You can follow me on
[Amit Varma]: Twitter at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A. You can browse past episodes of The Scene
[Amit Varma]: and the Unseen at sceneunseen.in and thinkpragati.com. The Scene and the Unseen is supported by the
[Amit Varma]: Takshashila Institution. Do check out more about the public policy courses at takshashila.org.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.